Greek Translation

Chapter 1
In the beginning God made the heaven[s] and the earth.
The earth was not visible and not formed and darkness [was] above the abyss. The breath of god was being brought above the water.
Then God said "Let there be light," and light came to be.
Then God saw the light, that [it was] good. God separated between the light and the darkness.
God called the light day and the darkness [he] called night; and night was and it was morning, day one
Then God said "Let there be firmament in the middle of the water and let it be separating between water and water." It came to be like this.
God made the firmament and God separated between the water, which was below the firmament, and between the water above the firmament.
God called the firmament sky and God saw that [it was] good; night was and it was morning, day two.
Then God said "Water under the sky come together into one gathering, and land be seen." It came to be like this: the water under the sky was brought together into their groups, and the land was seen.
God called the land earth and the groups of water [He] called oceans. and God said that [it was] good.
Then God said "Let the earth grow pastures of grass with seed according to species and according to likeness and fruit bearing trees, the seed of which [tree] [is] according to species on the earth." It came to be like this.
The earth brought forth pastures of grass with seed according to both species and likeness and fruit bearing trees, the seed of which [tree] [is] according to species on the earth. God saw that [it was] good.
Night was and it was morning, day three.
God said "Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to separate the light of the earth between day and night and let them [the lights] be for signs and for seasons and for days and for years.
and let them be for light in the firmament of the heaven in order to shine upon the earth." It came it be like this.
God made both the lights great, the great light in the beginning of the day and the little light in the beginning of the night, and the stars.
Then God put them [stars, big light, and little light] in the firmament of the heaven in order to shine upon the earth
and to rule the day and the night and to separate between the light and the darkness. God saw that [it was] good.
Night was and it was morning, fourth day.
Then God said "Let the water bring out living souls and flying birds upon the earth and around the firmament of the heaven[s]." It came to be like this.
Then God made the great sea monsters and all of the moving living creatures, which lead the water according to their kind, and all the flying birds according to type. God saw that [it was] good.
God blessed them saying "Increase and multiply and fill the waters in the seas and let the birds multiply on the earth."
Night was and it was morning, fifth day.
God said "Let the earth bring out living creatures according to kind, four footed things and creeping things and wild animals of the earth according to kind." It came to be like this.
Then God made the wild animals of the earth according to kind and the herds according to kind and all the animals of the earth according to their kinds. God saw that [it was] good.
Then God said "Let us make man according to our image and according to [our] likeness, and let them rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the heavens and the livestock and all of the earth and all of the creeping animals on the earth."
God made man, according to the image of God He made him, man and woman He made them.
Then God blessed them saying "Increase and multiply and fill the earth and exercise dominion over it and rule the fish of the sea and the birds of the sky and all of the flocks and all of the earth and all of the creeping animals on the earth."
God said "Look I have given to you all grass yielding seed, all which is upon the earth, and all trees, which have seed yielding fruit. It will be to you as food."
To all the wild animals of the earth and to all the birds of the sky and to all the creeping animals of the earth, [all] whom have the spirit of life in them, all the green grass [will be] for food." It came to be like this.
God saw all the things, as much as He made, and, look, [it was] very good. Night came to be and it was morning, sixth day.

Chapter 2
Heaven was finished and the earth also and all of the organization of them.
God finished His work on the seventh day and He rested on the seventh day from all of His works.
God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on it He rested from all of his works.
This [is] the record of the generations of heaven and of earth, from when it came to be, from the day God made heaven and the earth.
Before they existed [God made] every green thing of the field of the earth, before the growth of all the grass of the field, for God had not made it rain on the earth and there was no man to work the ground.
Water was rising up out from the ground and was watering all the face of the earth,
then God formed man of dust from the earth and breathed into his face the breath of life, and man became a living being.
The Lord God planted a garden in Eden around the east and He put the man he made there.
Then God sprung up every tree pleasant to sight and fine for food and the tree of life in the middle of the garden and the tree of wisdom of good and bad.
The river went forth out of Eden to water the garden, from there it divided itself into four origins.
The name of one [is] Pishon. This one is surrounding all the land Havilah, where there is gold.
The gold of that land [is] good, and there is coal, stone, and bdellium too.
The name of the second river [is] Gihon. This one is surrounding all the land of Ethiopia.
The third river [is] Tigris. This one goes near Assyria. The fourth river [is] the Euphrates.
The Lord God took the man, whom he formed, and He put him in the garden to work it and to guard [it].
Then the Lord God commanded Adam saying, "From every tree in the garden you will eat,
but from the tree of knowing good and evil, you will not eat of it, for, if so, the day which you eat from it, you will surely die."
Then the Lord God said "[It is] not good [for] man to be alone, I will make a helper from him like him."
Then God formed out of the earth all the wild animals of the field and all the birds of the sky and He brought them toward Adam so that he could see them, "What will you call them," and Adam named each of them.
Adam called the names to every animal and to all the birds of the sky and to all the wild animals of the field, but for Adam no helper like him was found.
God threw a distraction at Adam, and He took one of the sides of him and He filled up the body like [it was] before it.
The Lord God built the side, which He took from Adam, into woman and He brought her close to Adam.
Adam said, "Now this [is] bone out of my bone and flesh out of my flesh, she will be called woman, because out of man she was taken."
Because of this, man will leave his father and his mother and he will be stuck to his wife. Both will be in one body.
At that time, when Adam and his wife were not ashamed, they were both naked.

Chapter 3
The snake was the most prudent of all of the wild animals in the garden, which the Lord God made. The snake said to the woman "What did God say, 'You will not eat of any tree in the garden'?"
The woman said to the snake, "We will eat from the fruit of the tree[s] of the garden
but from the fruit of the tree which is in the middle of the garden," God said, "we will not eat from it and not touch it, so that we do not die."
The snake said to the woman, "Surely you will not die,
for God has known that on the day you will eat from it, your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil."
The woman saw that the tree [was] good for food and that to see it [was] delightful to the eyes and it was good to understand. Taking the fruit of it she ate, and she gave also to her husband who was with her, and he ate.
Both of their eyes were opened, and they knew that they were naked, and they sewed the leaves of a fig tree and made coverings for themselves.
Then, they heard the sound of the Lord God walking in the afternoon in the garden, and they hid, both the man and his wife, from the face of the Lord God in the middle of the tree[s] of the garden.
The Lord God called Adam and said to Adam, "Where are you?"
He said to him "I heard the sound of you walking in the garden and I was frightened, because I am naked, and I was hidden"
He said to him, "Who told you that you are naked? Not from the tree, the only one of which I commanded you not to eat, you ate?"
Adam said "The woman, which you made after me, she gave to me from the tree, and I ate."
The Lord God said to the woman, "What is this that you did?" The woman said "The snake deceived me, and I ate."
The Lord God said to the snake, "Because of what you did, you are cursed from all of the livestock and the wild animals of the earth. On your chest and by your stomach you will go and earth you will eat all the days of your life.
and I will put hatred in between you and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring. He will guard your head, and you will guard his heel."
He said to the woman, "I will surely multiply your pain. In pain you will bear children and your diversion [will be] against your husband, and he will rule you."
To Adam He said, "Because you heard the sound of the woman and you ate from the tree, which I commanded you not to eat of this only, the ground [is] cursed by your work, in pain you will eat of it all the days of your life
and it will bring up thorns and thistles to you, and you will eat the grass of the field.
By the sweat of your face you will eat your bread until you return to the ground. Out of it you were taken, because you are earth, and into earth you will return."
Adam called the name of his wife Zoe, because she [was] mother of all of the living.
The Lord God made for Adam and his wife clothing of skins and both wore them.
God said "Look, Adam has become like one out of us knowing good and evil, and now lest he will reach out and take of the tree of life and eat and will live into eternity."
The Lord God sent him out of the garden of delight to work the ground, out of which he was taken.
He threw Adam out and he settled before the garden of delight and He appointed the cherubim and a flaming sword turning away to guard the road of the tree of life.

Chapter 4
Now Adam knew Eve his wife, and being pregnant she bore Cain and she said, "I have gotten for myself a man through God."
She repeated this to bear his brother Abel. Abel became a shepherd of sheep, and Cain was working the ground.
It happened after some days Cain brought to the Lord an offering from the fruit of the land,
and Abel brought also one from the firstborns of his sheep and from their fat. God saw Abel and his gifts,
but to Cain and his sacrifices [God] did not pay attention. He angered Cain exceedingly, and [Cain] fell to [his] face.
The Lord God said to Cain, "Why are you angry, and why did your face fall?
If you brought things correctly, but did not separate it correctly, did you not make a mistake? Be silent, its return is against you but you will rule it."
Cain said to his brother Abel, "We should go into the field." It happened while he was in the field that Cain rose against his brother Abel and killed him.
God said to Cain, "Where is your brother Abel?" he said, "I don't know, am I the guard of my brother?"
God said "What did you do? The voice of your brother's blood cries to me from the earth.
Now you are cursed from the ground, which opened its mouth to take in your brother's blood out of your hand.
You will work the ground, and it will surely not give its strength to you, and you will be moaning and trembling on the earth."
Cain said to the Lord, "My punishment is greater than I can bear.
If you cast me out today from the face of the earth also from your face I will be hidden, and I will be grieving and trembling on the earth, and it will be that every person who finds me will kill me."
The Lord God said to him, "Not like this, every man who kills Cain will pay seven penalties." The Lord God put a mark on Cain lest any finding him are to kill him.
Cain went out from the presence of God and settled in the land of Nod, opposite of Eden.
Cain knew his wife, and being pregnant she gave birth to Enoch, and he was building a city in the name of the son of Enoch.
To Enoch Irad was born, and Irad fathered Mehujael, and Mehujael fathered Methushael, and Methushael fathered Lamech.
Lamech took for himself two wives. The name of the first was Adah and the name of the second was Zillah.
Adah bore Jabal, he was the father of the people dwelling in tents and have livestock.
The name of his brother was Jubal, he was the discoverer of the harp and lyre.
Zillah herself bore also Tubal-cain, he was a hammering blacksmith of bronze and iron. The sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah.
Lamech said to his wives Adah and Zillah, "Here my voice, wives of Lamech, give your ear to my words. I killed a man for the wound [he did] to me, and a young man for the bruise [he did] to me."
From Cain the revenge has been seven times, then out of Lamech [it is] seventy seven times.
Adam knew his wife Eve, and being pregnant she bore a son and named his name Seth saying, "God raised for me another seed in place of Abel, whom Cain killed."
To Seth a son was born, and he called his name Enosh. He decided to call on the name of the Lord God.

Chapter 5
This [is] the book of the family of man on the day God created Adam, He made him according to the image of God.
Male and female he made them and He blessed them. He called their name Man on the day He made them.
When Adam lived 230 years, he also fathered [a son] according to his image and likeness and he called his name Seth.
The days of Adam were 700 after he fathered Seth, and he fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Adam, which he lived, were 930 years, and he died.
When Seth lived 205 years, then he fathered Enosh.
Seth lived after he fathered Enosh 707 years and he fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Seth were 912 years, and he died.
When Enosh lived 90 years, then he fathered Kenan.
Enosh lived after he fathered Kenan 715 years and he fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Enosh were 905 years, and he died.
When Kenan lived 170 years then he fathered Mahalalel.
Kenan lived after he fathered Mahalalel 740 years and he fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Kenen were 910 years, and he died.
Mahalalel lived 165 years, then he fathered Jared.
Mahalalel lived after fathering Jared 730 years and fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Mahalalel were 895 years and he died.
Jared lived 162 years and he fathered Enoch.
Jared lived after fathering Enoch 800 years and fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Jared were 962 years and he died.
Enoch lived 165 years and he fathered Methuselah.
Enoch pleased God after fathering Methuselah 200 years and fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Enoch were 365 years.
Enoch pleased God and he was not found because God took him.
Methuselah lived 167 years and he fathered Lamech.
Methuselah lived after fathering Lamech 802 years and fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Methuselah, which he lived, [were] 969 years and he died.
Lamech lived 188 years and fathered a son
and his name was called Noah saying, "This one will relieve us from our work and from the pain of our hands and from the earth which the Lord God cursed."
Lamech lived after fathering Noah 565 years and fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Lamech were 753 years and he died.
Noah was of 500 years and Noah fathered three sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth.
