Hebrew Translation

Chapter 1
At first, God created the heavens and the earth.
The earth was formless and empty and darkness [was] over the face of the abyss. The breath of God was brooding over the face of the waters.
Then God said "Let there be light" and there was light.
God saw the light, that [it was] good, and God separated the light and the darkness.
God called to the light day and the dark [he] called night. It was evening and it was morning, day one.
Then God said "Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters and let it be a separation between the waters and the waters.
God made the expanse and [He] separated between the waters which [were] below the expanse and the waters which [were] above the expanse. It came to be.
God called the expanse sky. It was evening and it was morning, the second day.
Then God said "Let the waters from under the heavens come together into one place and let the dry land appear." It came to be.
God called the dry land earth and the gathering of the waters [He] called seas. God saw that [it was] good.
Then God said "Let the earth sprout plants yielding seed and fruit trees yielding seed of every type on the earth." It came to be.
The earth brought forth plants yielding seed and fruit trees yielding seed of every type on the earth. God saw it [was] good.
It was evening and it was morning, third day.
Then God said "Let there be lights in the expanse of the heavens to separate between the day and the night and let them be for signs and for seasons and for days and years.
Let them serve as lights in the expanse of the heavens to light over the earth." It came to be.
God made both of the great lights, the great light for ruling the day and the little light for ruling the night and the stars.
God placed them [stars, great light, and little light] in the expanse of the heavens to be lights upon the earth
and to rule over the day and the night and to separate between the light and the darkness. God saw that [it was] good.
It was evening and it was morning, fourth day.
Then God said "Let the waters team with swarms of living creatures and let the birds fly above the earth, across the expanse of the heavens."
God made the great sea monsters and all the living creatures. [He made] the things which crawl, [the things which] swarm the earth [according] to their kinds, and all the flying birds [according] to type. God saw that [it was] good.
God blessed them saying "Be fruitful and multiply and fill the waters in the seas and let the bird multiply on the earth."
It was evening and it was morning, fifth day.
Then God said "Let the earth bring out living things [according] to kind, livestock and creeping things and living things of the earth [according] to kind." It came to be.
God made the wild things of the earth [according] to their kinds and the domestic things [according] to their kinds and all of the creeping thing[s] of the ground [according] to their kinds. God saw that [it was] good.
Then God said "Let us make human kind in our image according to our likeness and let them rule the fish of the sea and the birds of the heavens and the domestic animals and all of the earth and all of the creeping things of the earth."
Then God created man, in His image. In the image of God He created him [man]. Male and female He created them.
God blessed them and God said to them "Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and rule over the fish of the sea and over the bird[s] of the heavens and over all of the creeping things on the earth."
God said "Here I have given you all the plants yielding seed, all which is on the face of the earth, and all of the trees which produce seed bearing fruit. It will be for food.
and all of the wild animals of the earth and all the bird of the sky and all the creeping things on the earth, [all] which in it [is] a living breath, all green plants [I have given] for food." It came to be.
God saw all which he made and indeed [it was] very good. There was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.

Chapter 2
The heavens and the earth were finished and all of the hosts.
God finished on the seventh day His work and He rested on the seventh day from all of His work.
Then, God blessed the seventh day and consecrated it because on it He rested from all of His work, which God made in creating.
These [are] generations of the heavens and the earth at their creation, from the day the Lord God made the heavens and the earth.
[God made] every bush of the field before it was in the earth and every plant of the field before it grew because the Lord God did not make it rain over the earth and there was no man to work the land.
Water was rising up from the earth and watering all of the face of the ground.
Then, the Lord God made man [with] dust from the ground and He breathed into the nostrils the breath of life and the man was a living creature.
The Lord God planted a garden at Eden in the east and He put man there who He formed.
The Lord God sprouted up from the earth every tree delightful to see and good for food and the tree of life in the midst of the garden and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
A river came out of Eden to water the garden and from there it divided itself and became four new branches.
The name of one [is] Pishon. It surrounded all the land of Havilah, where there is gold.
The gold of that land [is] good. There [is] bdellium, stone, and onyx as well.
The name of the second river [is] Gihon. It surrounded all the land of Cush.
The name of the third river [is] Tigris. It goes east of Assyria. The fourth river, [is] Euphrates.
The Lord God took the man and put him in the garden of Eden to work her and to keep her.
Then, the Lord God commanded the man saying, "You will surely eat from every tree of the garden,
but from the tree of knowledge of good and evil, you will not eat from it, because on the day you eat from it you will surely die."
The Lord God said [it is] not good [for] man to be alone. I will make for him a helper as his partner.
Then, the Lord God formed from the ground every living creature of the field and every bird of the sky. He brought [them] to the man to see what he would call them and whatever the man called the living creatures [that would be] their names.
The man spoke the names for every domestic animal and for the birds of the sky and for every beast of the field but for the man a helper was not found as his partner.
The Lord God made sleep fall upon the man and He took one of his ribs from him and He closed flesh around it.
The Lord God made the rib which was taken from the man into woman and He brought her to the man.
The man said, "Now this one [is] bone from my bone and flesh from my flesh and I will call this one woman because she was taken from man."
Thus, a man will leave his father and his mother and he clings to his wife and they are one flesh.
They were both naked, the man and his wife were not ashamed.

Chapter 3
The serpent was more crafty than every animal of the field which the Lord God made. He said to the woman, "Did God really say 'You must not eat from any tree in the garden'?"
The woman said to the serpent, "We may eat of the fruit of the tree of the garden
but from the fruit of the tree which is in the middle of the garden," God said, "you must not eat from it and not touch it lest you will die."
The serpent said to the woman, "Surely you will not die,
for God knows that on the day you are to eat of it your eyes will be opened and you will be like God knowing good and evil."
The woman saw that the tree [was] good for food and because it [was] delightful to the eyes and the tree was desirable to make one wise, she took the fruit from it and ate, and she gave also to her husband who [was] with her and he ate.
Both of their eyes were opened and they knew that they [were] naked, so they sewed the leaves of a fig tree and made coverings for themselves.
They heard the sound of the Lord God walking back and forth in the breeze of the afternoon and the man and the woman hid from the presence of the Lord God in the middle of the tree[s] of the garden.
The Lord God called to Adam saying to him "Where are you?"
He said "I heard your sound in the garden and I was afraid because [I was] naked and I hid myself."
He said "Who has told you that [you are] naked? Did you eat from the tree which I commanded you not to?"
Adam said "The woman which you put with me, she gave to me from the tree and I ate."
The Lord God said to the woman "What is this you have done?" and the woman said, "The serpent deceived me, and I ate."
The Lord God said to the snake, "Because of this that you did, you have been cursed above all of the livestock and above all of the wild animals of the field. On your belly you will go and you will eat dust all of the days of your life.
I will put enmity between you and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring. He will bruise your head, and you will bruise his heel."
To the woman He said, "I will greatly multiply the pain of your childbearing. You will bring forth children in pain, and unto your husband will be your desire, and he will rule over you."
To Adam He said, "Because you listened to the voice of your wife and have eaten from the tree which I commanded you saying 'you shall not eat from it' the ground is cursed because of you and you will eat by means of pain all of the days of your life
and thorns and thistles will be brought up to you and you will eat plants of the field.
By the sweat of your face you will eat bread until you are to return to the earth that you were taken from it, because you are dust and you will return to dust."
The man called the name of his wife Eve because she was mother of all of the living.
The Lord God made for Adam and for his wife garments of skin and clothed them.
The Lord God said "Behold Adam has become like one of us knowing good and evil, and now lest he will reach out his hand and take from the tree of life and eat and live forever."
So, the Lord God sent him out of the garden of Eden to work the ground which he was taken from.
He drove Adam out and to the east of the garden of Eden He placed Cherubim and the flaming sword which turns away to guard the path to the tree of life.

Chapter 4
Adam knew Eve his wife and she conceived and bore Cain and said "I have gotten a man by the Lord."
Again she bore his brother Abel. Abel was keeper of the flocks and Cain was a worker of the ground.
After some time Cain brought from the fruit of the ground an offering for the Lord.
Abel brought [an offering] also, he from the firstborns of his flocks and from their fat. God saw Abel and his offerings,
but God did not see Cain and his offerings. Cain was very angry and his face fell.
The Lord said to Cain "Why are you angry, and why did your face fall?
Is it not true that if you do well, acceptance? If you don't do well sin is crouching at the door and its desire is toward you but you must master it."
Cain said to Abel his brother "Let us go into the field." Then, Cain rose against Abel his brother and killed him.
God said to Cain "Where is your brother, Abel?" and he said, "I don't know. Am I the keeper of my brother?"
He said "What did you do? The voice of your brother's blood is crying out to me from the ground.
Now you are cursed from the ground which opened its mouth to receive the blood of your brother from your hand.
When you work the ground it shall no longer yield its strength to you, you will be a wanderer and an outlaw on the earth."
Cain said to the Lord, "My punishment is too great to bear.
Behold, you have driven me today from the face of the earth and from your presence I will be hidden and I will be an outlaw and wanderer on the earth and it will be that each person who finds me will kill me."
The Lord said to him, "[It is] not so, every man slaying Cain will suffer vengeance seven times over" and God put a sign on Cain lest any who find him hurt him.
Cain went out from the presence of God and settled in the land of Nod, east of Eden.
Cain knew his wife and she conceived and bore Enoch, he was building a city and called the name of the city like the name of his son Enoch.
To Enoch was born Irad and Irad fathered Mehujael. Mehujael fathered Methushael, and Methushael fathered Lamech.
Lamech took to himself two wives the first one named Adah and the other named Zillah.
Adah bore Jabal, he was father of those dwelling in tents and [having] livestock.
The name of his brother was Jubal, he was father to all playing a lyre or a pipe.
Zillah, also bore Tubal-cain, crafter of all instruments of bronze and iron. The sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah.
Lamech said to his wives Adah and Zillah, "Listen to my voice, wives of Lamech, listen to my words. I killed a man for wounding me and a child for striking me."
If the revenge from Cain is seven fold, then Lamech's is seventy seven fold.
Adam again knew his wife, she bore a son and called his name the name Seth because "God gave to me another seed in place of Abel because Cain killed him."
To Seth also a son was born and he called his name Enosh, then he began to call on the name of the Lord.

Chapter 5
This [is] the book of the descendants of Adam. On the day God created man, in the likeness of God He made him.
Male and female He created them and He blessed them. He called their name Man on the day He made them.
When Adam lived 130 years and fathered in his likeness according to his image [a son] and he called his name Seth.
The days of Adam after he fathered Seth were 800 years and he fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Adam, which he lived, were 930 years, and he died.
When Seth lived 105 years then he fathered Enosh.
After Seth fathered Enosh he lived 807 years and he fathered sons and daughters.
The days of Seth were 912 years and he died.
When Enosh lived 9 years then he fathered Kenan.
After he fathered Kenan, Enosh lived 815 years and fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Enosh were 905 years and he died.
When Kenan lived 70 years then he fathered Mahalalel
Kenan lived after he fathered Mahalalel 840 years and he fathered sone and daughters.
All the days of Kenen were 910 years and he died.
Mahalalel lived 65 years then fathered Jared.
Mahalalel lived after fathering Jared 830 years and fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Mahalalel were 895 years and he died.
Jared lived 162 years then he fathered Enoch.
and Jared lived after fathering Enoch 800 years and he fathered sons and daughters.
All of the days of Jared were 962 years and he died.
Enoch lived 65 years then he fathered Methuselah.
Enoch walked with God after he fathered Methuselah 300 years and fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Enoch were 365 years.
Enoch walked with God and he was not because God took him.
Methuselah lived 187 years then he fathered Lamech.
Methuselah lived after he fathered Lamech 782 years and he fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Methuselah were 969 years and he died.
Lamech lived 183 years then he fathered a son.
He called his name Noah to say, "This one will relieve us from our work and from the pain of our hands and from the earth which the Lord cursed."
Lamech lived after fathering Noah 595 years and fathered sons and daughters.
All the days of Lamech were 777 years and he died.
Noah was the son of 500 years when he fathered Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
