

Genesis
English: ESV
Greek: LXX Rahlf's
Greek Translation: Brienna DiPietro
Hebrew: HMT-W4
Hebrew Translation: Brienna DiPietro
Notes: Commentary Brienna DiPietro

Genesis.1.1
English: In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth.
Greek:	Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν.
Greek Translation: In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth.
Hebrew: בְּרֵאשִׁ֖ית בָּרָ֣א אֱלֹהִ֑ים אֵ֥ת הַשָּׁמַ֖יִם וְאֵ֥ת הָאָֽרֶץ׃
Hebrew Translation: at first God created the heavens and the earth
Notes:
- nuances of first phrase, what's coming into being? putting together or creating

Genesis.1.2
English: The earth was without form and void, and darkness was over the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters.
Greek: ἡ δὲ γῆ ἦν ἀόρατος καὶ ἀκατασκεύαστος, καὶ σκότος ἐπάνω τῆς ἀβύσσου, καὶ πνεῦμα θεοῦ ἐπεφέρετο ἐπάνω τοῦ ὕδατος.
Greek Translation: and the earth was not visible and not formed, and darkness [was] above the abyss, and the breath of god was being brought above the water.
Hebrew: וְהָאָ֗רֶץ הָיְתָ֥ה תֹ֨הוּ֙ וָבֹ֔הוּ וְחֹ֖שֶׁךְ עַל־פְּנֵ֣י תְה֑וֹם וְר֣וּחַ אֱלֹהִ֔ים מְרַחֶ֖פֶת עַל־פְּנֵ֥י הַמָּֽיִם
Hebrew Translation: and the earth was formless and empty and darkness [was] over the face of the abyss and the breath of God brooding over the face of the waters
Notes:
- Very liberal with the use of plurals from Greek to ESV
- Greek is totally different
- Piel verb מְרַחֶ֖פֶת and weird definition

Genesis.1.3
English: And God said, “Let there be light,” and there was light.
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός Γενηθήτω φῶς. καὶ ἐγένετο φῶς.
Greek Translation: and god said Let there be light. and light came to be.
Hebrew:  וַיֹּ֥אמֶר אֱלֹהִ֖ים יְהִ֣י א֑וֹר וַֽיְהִי־אֽוֹר׃
Hebrew Translation: and God said let there be light and there was light
Notes:
- patterning of divine names in the Greek
      elohim, θεος: God
      YHWH, κύριος: the Lord


Genesis.1.4
English: And God saw that the light was good. And God separated the light from the darkness.
Greek: καὶ εἶδεν ὁ θεὸς τὸ φῶς ὅτι καλόν. καὶ διεχώρισεν ὁ θεὸς ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ φωτὸς καὶ ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ σκότους.
Greek Translation: and god saw the light, that [it was] good. and god separated between the light and between the darkness.
Hebrew: וַיַּ֧רְא אֱלֹהִ֛ים אֶת־הָא֖וֹר כִּי־ט֑וֹב וַיַּבְדֵּ֣ל אֱלֹהִ֔ים בֵּ֥ין הָא֖וֹר וּבֵ֥ין הַחֹֽשֶׁךְ׃
Hebrew Translation: and God saw the light that [it was] good and God separated the light and the darkness
Notes:
- κὰλον can be nom or acc

Genesis.1.5
English: God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And there was evening and there was morning, the first day.
Greek: καὶ ἐκάλεσεν ὁ θεὸς τὸ φῶς ἡμέραν καὶ τὸ σκότος ἐκάλεσεν νύκτα. καὶ ἐγένετο ἑσπέρα καὶ ἐγένετο πρωί, ἡμέρα μία.
Greek Translation: and god called the light day and the darkness [he] called night. and night was and it was morning, day one
Hebrew: וַיִּקְרָ֨א אֱלֹהִ֤ים ׀ לָאוֹר֙ י֔וֹם וְלַחֹ֖שֶׁךְ קָ֣רָא לָ֑יְלָה וַֽיְהִי־עֶ֥רֶב
Hebrew Translation: and God called to the light day and to the dark [he] called night and it was evening and it was morning, day one.
Notes:
- ἑσπέρα is a noun πρωί is an adverb
- ἐγένετο has creation in it; serious beef

Genesis.1.6
English: And God said, Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and let it separate the waters from the waters.”
Greek: Καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός Γενηθήτω στερέωμα ἐν μέσῳ τοῦ ὕδατος καὶ ἔστω διαχωρίζον ἀνὰ μέσον ὕδατος καὶ ὕδατος. καὶ ἐγένετο οὕτως.
Greek Translation: and God said Let there be firmament in the middle of the water and let it be separating between water and water. and it came to be like this.
Hebrew: וַיֹּ֣אמֶר אֱלֹהִ֔ים יְהִ֥י רָקִ֖יעַ בְּת֣וֹךְ הַמָּ֑יִם וִיהִ֣י מַבְדִּ֔יל בֵּ֥ין מַ֖יִם לָמָֽיִם׃
Hebrew Translation: and God said let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters and let it there be a separation between the waters and the waters.
Notes:
- did it not come to be?

Genesis.1.7
English: And God made the expanse and separated the waters that were under the expanse from the waters that were above the expanse. And it was so.
Greek:  καὶ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τὸ στερέωμα, καὶ διεχώρισεν ὁ θεὸς ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ ὕδατος, ὃ ἦν ὑποκάτω τοῦ στερεώματος, καὶ ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ ὕδατος τοῦ ἐπάνω τοῦ στερεώματος.
Greek Translation: and God made the firmament, and God separated between the water, which was below the firmament, and between the water above the firmament.
Hebrew: וַיַּ֣עַשׂ אֱלֹהִים֮ אֶת־הָרָקִיעַ֒ וַיַּבְדֵּ֗ל בֵּ֤ין הַמַּ֙יִם֙ אֲשֶׁר֙ מִתַּ֣חַת לָרָקִ֔יעַ וּבֵ֣ין הַמַּ֔יִם אֲשֶׁ֖ר מֵעַ֣ל לָרָקִ֑יעַ וַֽיְהִי־כֵֽן׃
Hebrew Translation: and God made the expanse and [He] separated between the waters which [were] from below the expanse and between the waters which [were] above the expanse and so it came to be.
Notes:
- firmament/separator in Greek
- the Greek lacks so much parallelism

Genesis.1.8
English: And God called the expanse Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, the second day.
Greek: καὶ ἐκάλεσεν ὁ θεὸς τὸ στερέωμα οὐρανόν. καὶ εἶδεν ὁ θεὸς ὅτι καλόν. καὶ ἐγένετο ἑσπέρα καὶ ἐγένετο πρωί, ἡμέρα δευτέρα.
Greek Translation: and God called the firmament sky. and God saw that [it was] good. and night was and it was morning, day two.
Hebrew:  וַיִּקְרָ֧א אֱלֹהִ֛ים לָֽרָקִ֖יעַ שָׁמָ֑יִם וַֽיְהִי־עֶ֥רֶב וַֽיְהִי־בֹ֖קֶר י֥וֹם שֵׁנִֽי׃
Hebrew Translation: and God called the expanse sky and it was evening and it was morning, the second day.
Notes
- did the Greeks even have the same general idea

Genesis.1.9
English: And God said, “Let the waters under the heavens be gathered together into one place, and let the dry land appear.” And it was so.
Greek: Καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός Συναχθήτω τὸ ὕδωρ τὸ ὑποκάτω τοῦ οὐρανοῦ εἰς συναγωγὴν μίαν, καὶ ὀφθήτω ἡ ξηρά. καὶ ἐγένετο οὕτως. καὶ συνήχθη τὸ ὕδωρ τὸ ὑποκάτω τοῦ οὐρανοῦ εἰς τὰς συναγωγὰς αὐτῶν, καὶ ὤφθη ἡ ξηρά.
Greek Translation: and God said Water under the sky be brought together into one gathering, and land be seen. and it came to be like this. and the water under the sky was brought together into their groups, and the land was seen.
Hebrew: וַיֹּ֣אמֶר אֱלֹהִ֗ים יִקָּו֨וּ הַמַּ֜יִם מִתַּ֤חַת הַשָּׁמַ֙יִם֙ אֶל־מָק֣וֹם אֶחָ֔ד וְתֵרָאֶ֖ה הַיַּבָּשָׁ֑ה וַֽיְהִי־כֵֽן
Hebrew Translation: and God said let the waters from under the heavens come together into one place and let the dry land appear and so it came to be.
Notes:
- awkward pulling the water together in Greek

Genesis.1.10
English: God called the dry land Earth, and the waters that were gathered together he called Seas. And God saw that it was good.
Greek: καὶ ἐκάλεσεν ὁ θεὸς τὴν ξηρὰν γῆν καὶ τὰ συστήματα τῶν ὑδάτων ἐκάλεσεν θαλάσσας. καὶ εἶδεν ὁ θεὸς ὅτι καλόν.
Greek Translation: and God called the land earth and the groups of water [He] called oceans. and God said that [it was] good.
Hebrew: וַיִּקְרָ֨א אֱלֹהִ֤ים ׀ לַיַּבָּשָׁה֙ אֶ֔רֶץ וּלְמִקְוֵ֥ה הַמַּ֖יִם קָרָ֣א יַמִּ֑ים וַיַּ֥רְא אֱלֹהִ֖ים כִּי־טֽוֹב׃
Hebrew Translation: and God called the dry land earth and the gathering of the waters [He] called seas. and God saw that [it was] good.
Notes:
- lamed: with the respect to
- gathering of waters is the ritual bath

Genesis.1.11
English: And God said, “Let the earth sprout vegetation, plants yielding seed, and fruit trees bearing fruit in which is their seed, each according to its kind, on the earth.” And it was so.
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός Βλαστησάτω ἡ γῆ βοτάνην χόρτου, σπεῖρον σπέρμα κατὰ γένος καὶ καθ᾿ ὁμοιότητα, καὶ ξύλον κάρπιμον ποιοῦν καρπόν, οὗ τὸ σπέρμα αὐτοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ κατὰ γένος ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. καὶ ἐγένετο οὕτως.
Greek Translation: and God said Let the earth grow pastures of grass, sowing seed according to species and according to likeness, and fruit bearing trees making fruit, the seed of which [tree] [is] in it according to species on the earth. and it came to be like this.
Hebrew: וַיֹּ֣אמֶר אֱלֹהִ֗ים תַּֽדְשֵׁ֤א הָאָ֙רֶץ֙ דֶּ֔שֶׁא עֵ֚שֶׂב מַזְרִ֣יעַ זֶ֔רַע עֵ֣ץ פְּרִ֞י עֹ֤שֶׂה פְּרִי֙ לְמִינ֔וֹ אֲשֶׁ֥ר זַרְעוֹ־ב֖וֹ עַל־הָאָ֑רֶץ וַֽיְהִי־כֵֽן׃
Hebrew Translation: and God said let the earth sprout plants yielding seed and fruit trees yielding seed of every type on the earth and so it came to be.
Notes:
-

Genesis.1.12
English: The earth brought forth vegetation, plants yielding seed according to their own kinds, and trees bearing fruit in which is their seed, each according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
Greek:καὶ ἐξήνεγκεν ἡ γῆ βοτάνην χόρτου, σπεῖρον σπέρμα κατὰ γένος καὶ καθ᾿ ὁμοιότητα, καὶ ξύλον κάρπιμον ποιοῦν καρπόν, οὗ τὸ σπέρμα αὐτοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ κατὰ γένος ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. καὶ εἶδεν ὁ θεὸς ὅτι καλόν.
Greek Translation: and the earth brought forth pastures of grass, sowing seed according to both species and similarity, and fruit bearing trees making fruit, the seed of which [tree] [is] in it according to species on the earth. and God saw that [it was] good.
Hebrew:וַתּוֹצֵ֨א הָאָ֜רֶץ דֶּ֠שֶׁא עֵ֣שֶׂב מַזְרִ֤יעַ זֶ֙רַע֙ לְמִינֵ֔הוּ וְעֵ֧ץ עֹֽשֶׂה־פְּרִ֛י אֲשֶׁ֥ר זַרְעוֹ־ב֖וֹ לְמִינֵ֑הוּ וַיַּ֥רְא אֱלֹהִ֖ים כִּי־טֽוֹב׃
Hebrew Translation: and the earth brought forth plants yielding seed and fruit trees yielding seed of every type on the earth. and God saw it [was] good
Notes:
- simplicity of Hebrew at the end

Genesis.1.13
English: And there was evening and there was morning, the third day.
Greek: καὶ ἐγένετο ἑσπέρα καὶ ἐγένετο πρωί, ἡμέρα τρίτη.
Greek Translation: and night was and it was morning, day three
Hebrew: וַֽיְהִי־עֶ֥רֶב וַֽיְהִי־בֹ֖קֶר י֥וֹם שְׁלִישִֽׁי׃
Hebrew Translation: and it was evening and it was morning, third day
Notes:
-

Genesis.1.14
English: And God said, “Let there be lights in the expanse of the heavens to separate the day from the night. And let them be for signs and for seasons, and for days and years,
Greek: Καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός Γενηθήτωσαν φωστῆρες ἐν τῷ στερεώματι τοῦ οὐρανοῦ εἰς φαῦσιν τῆς γῆς τοῦ διαχωρίζειν ἀνὰ μέσον τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ ἀνὰ μέσον τῆς νυκτὸς καὶ ἔστωσαν εἰς σημεῖα καὶ εἰς καιροὺς καὶ εἰς ἡμέρας καὶ εἰς ἐνιαυτοὺς
Greek Translation: and God said let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to separate the light of the earth between day and night and let them [the lights] be for signs and for seasons and for days and for years
Hebrew: וַיֹּ֣אמֶר אֱלֹהִ֗ים יְהִ֤י מְאֹרֹת֙ בִּרְקִ֣יעַ הַשָּׁמַ֔יִם לְהַבְדִּ֕יל בֵּ֥ין הַיּ֖וֹם וּבֵ֣ין הַלָּ֑יְלָה וְהָי֤וּ לְאֹתֹת֙ וּלְמ֣וֹעֲדִ֔ים
Hebrew Translation: and God said let there be lights in the expanse of the heavens to separate between the day and the night and let them be for signs and for seasons and for days and years.
Notes:

Genesis.1.15
English: and let them be lights in the expanse of the heavens to give light upon the earth.” And it was so.
Greek: καὶ ἔστωσαν εἰς φαῦσιν ἐν τῷ στερεώματι τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ὥστε φαίνειν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. καὶ ἐγένετο οὕτως.
Greek Translation: and let them be for light in the firmament of the heaven in order to shine upon the earth. and it came it be like this.
Hebrew: וְהָי֤וּ לִמְאוֹרֹת֙ בִּרְקִ֣יעַ הַשָּׁמַ֔יִם לְהָאִ֖יר עַל־הָאָ֑רֶץ וַֽיְהִי־כֵֽן
Hebrew Translation: and let them serve as lights in the expanse of the heavens to light over the earth. and so it was.
Notes:
-

Genesis.1.16
English: And God made the two great lights—the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night—and the stars.
Greek: καὶ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τοὺς δύο φωστῆρας τοὺς μεγάλους, τὸν φωστῆρα τὸν μέγαν εἰς ἀρχὰς τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὸν φωστῆρα τὸν ἐλάσσω εἰς ἀρχὰς τῆς νυκτός, καὶ τοὺς ἀστέρας.
Greek Translation: and God made both the lights great, the great light in the beginning of the day and the little light in the beginning of the night, and the stars
Hebrew:  וַיַּ֣עַשׂ אֱלֹהִ֔ים אֶת־שְׁנֵ֥י הַמְּאֹרֹ֖ת הַגְּדֹלִ֑ים אֶת־הַמָּא֤וֹר הַגָּדֹל֙ לְמֶמְשֶׁ֣לֶת הַיּ֔וֹם וְאֶת־הַמָּא֤וֹר הַקָּטֹן֙ לְמֶמְשֶׁ֣לֶת הַלַּ֔יְלָה וְאֵ֖ת הַכּוֹכָבִֽים׃
Hebrew Translation: and God made both of the great lights, the great light for ruling the day and the little light for ruling the night- and the stars
Notes:
- strong disjunctive paired with DO marker?
- weird possession of the stars

Genesis.1.17
English: And God set them in the expanse of the heavens to give light on the earth
Greek: καὶ ἔθετο αὐτοὺς ὁ θεὸς ἐν τῷ στερεώματι τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ὥστε φαίνειν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς
Greek Translation: and God put them [stars, big light, and little light] in the firmament of the heaven in order to shine upon the earth
Hebrew: וַיִּתֵּ֥ן אֹתָ֛ם אֱלֹהִ֖ים בִּרְקִ֣יעַ הַשָּׁמָ֑יִם לְהָאִ֖יר עַל־הָאָֽרֶץ׃
Hebrew Translation: and God placed them [stars, great light, and little light] in the expanse of the heavens to be light upon the earth
Notes:
-

Genesis.1.18
English: to rule over the day and over the night, and to separate the light from the darkness. And God saw that it was good.
Greek: καὶ ἄρχειν τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τῆς νυκτὸς καὶ διαχωρίζειν ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ φωτὸς καὶ ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ σκότους. καὶ εἶδεν ὁ θεὸς ὅτι καλόν.
Greek Translation: and to rule the day and the night and to separate between the light and the darkness. and God saw that [it was] good.
Hebrew: וְלִמְשֹׁל֙ בַּיּ֣וֹם וּבַלַּ֔יְלָה וּֽלֲהַבְדִּ֔יל בֵּ֥ין הָא֖וֹר וּבֵ֣ין הַחֹ֑שֶׁךְ וַיַּ֥רְא אֱלֹהִ֖ים כִּי־טֽוֹב׃
Hebrew Translation: and to rule over the day and the night and to separate between the light and the darkness. and God saw that [it was] good.
Notes:
-

Genesis.1.19
English: And there was evening and there was morning, the fourth day.
Greek: καὶ ἐγένετο ἑσπέρα καὶ ἐγένετο πρωί, ἡμέρα τετάρτη.
Greek Translation: and night was and it was morning, fourth day.
Hebrew: וַֽיְהִי־עֶ֥רֶב וַֽיְהִי־בֹ֖קֶר י֥וֹם רְבִיעִֽי׃ פ
Hebrew Translation: and it was evening and it was morning, fourth day.
Notes:
-

Genesis.1.20
English: And God said, “Let the waters swarm with swarms of living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth across the expanse of the heavens.”
Greek: Καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός Ἐξαγαγέτω τὰ ὕδατα ἑρπετὰ ψυχῶν ζωσῶν καὶ πετεινὰ πετόμενα ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς κατὰ τὸ στερέωμα τοῦ οὐρανοῦ. καὶ ἐγένετο οὕτως.
Greek Translation: and God said Let the water bring out living souls and flying birds upon the earth and around the firmament of the heaven. and it came to be like this.
Hebrew: וַיֹּ֣אמֶר אֱלֹהִ֔ים יִשְׁרְצ֣וּ הַמַּ֔יִם שֶׁ֖רֶץ נֶ֣פֶשׁ חַיָּ֑ה וְעוֹף֙ יְעוֹפֵ֣ף עַל־הָאָ֔רֶץ עַל־פְּנֵ֖י רְקִ֥יעַ הַשָּׁמָֽיִם׃
Hebrew Translation: and God said let the waters team with the swarms of living creatures and let the birds fly above the earth, across the expanse of the heavens.
Notes:
- awkward construction all around
- it came to be in Greek

Genesis.1.21
English: So God created the great sea creatures and every living creature that moves, with which the waters swarm, according to their kinds, and every winged bird according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
Greek:  καὶ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τὰ κήτη τὰ μεγάλα καὶ πᾶσαν ψυχὴν ζῴων ἑρπετῶν, ἃ ἐξήγαγεν τὰ ὕδατα κατὰ γένη αὐτῶν, καὶ πᾶν πετεινὸν πτερωτὸν κατὰ γένος. καὶ εἶδεν ὁ θεὸς ὅτι καλά.
Greek Translation: and God made the great sea monsters and all of the moving living creatures, which lead the water according to  their kind, and all the flying birds according to type. and God saw that [it was] good.
Hebrew: וַיִּבְרָ֣א אֱלֹהִ֔ים אֶת־הַתַּנִּינִ֖ם הַגְּדֹלִ֑ים וְאֵ֣ת כָּל־נֶ֣פֶשׁ הַֽחַיָּ֣ה ׀ הָֽרֹמֶ֡שֶׂת אֲשֶׁר֩ שָׁרְצ֨וּ הַמַּ֜יִם לְמִֽינֵהֶ֗ם וְאֵ֨ת כָּל־ע֤וֹף כָּנָף֙ לְמִינֵ֔הוּ וַיַּ֥רְא אֱלֹהִ֖ים כִּי־טֽוֹב׃
Hebrew Translation: and God made the great sea monsters and all the living creatures. The things which crawl, swarm the earth [according] to their kinds, and all the flying birds [according] to type. and God saw that [it was] good.
Notes:
-

Genesis.1.22
English: And God blessed them, saying, n“Be fruitful and multiply and fill the waters in the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth.”
Greek: καὶ ηὐλόγησεν αὐτὰ ὁ θεὸς λέγων Αὐξάνεσθε καὶ πληθύνεσθε καὶ πληρώσατε τὰ ὕδατα ἐν ταῖς θαλάσσαις, καὶ τὰ πετεινὰ πληθυνέσθωσαν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς.
Greek Translation: and God blessed them saying Increase and multiply and fill the waters in the seas, and let the birds multiply on the earth.
Hebrew: וַיְבָ֧רֶךְ אֹתָ֛ם אֱלֹהִ֖ים לֵאמֹ֑ר פְּר֣וּ וּרְב֗וּ וּמִלְא֤וּ אֶת־הַמַּ֙יִם֙ בַּיַּמִּ֔ים וְהָע֖וֹף יִ֥רֶב בָּאָֽרֶץ׃
Hebrew Translation: and God blessed them saying to be fruitful and to multiple and to fill the waters in the seas and let the bird multiply on the earth.
Notes:
-

Genesis.1.23
English: And there was evening and there was morning, the fifth day.
Greek: καὶ ἐγένετο ἑσπέρα καὶ ἐγένετο πρωί, ἡμέρα πέμπτη.
Greek Translation: and night was and it was morning, fifth day.
Hebrew: וַֽיְהִי־עֶ֥רֶב וַֽיְהִי־בֹ֖קֶר י֥וֹם חֲמִישִֽׁי׃ פ
Hebrew Translation: and it was evening and it was morning, fifth day.
Notes:
-

Genesis.1.24
English: And God said, “Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds—livestock and creeping things and beasts of the earth according to their kinds.” And it was so.
Greek:	Καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός Ἐξαγαγέτω ἡ γῆ ψυχὴν ζῶσαν κατὰ γένος, τετράποδα καὶ ἑρπετὰ καὶ θηρία τῆς γῆς κατὰ γένος. καὶ ἐγένετο οὕτως.
Greek Translation: and God said Let the earth bring out living creatures according to kind, four footed things and creeping things and wild animals of the earth according to kind. and it came to be like this.
Hebrew: וַיֹּ֣אמֶר אֱלֹהִ֗ים תּוֹצֵ֨א הָאָ֜רֶץ נֶ֤פֶשׁ חַיָּה֙ לְמִינָ֔הּ בְּהֵמָ֥ה וָרֶ֛מֶשׂ וְחַֽיְתוֹ־אֶ֖רֶץ לְמִינָ֑הּ וַֽיְהִי־כֵֽן׃
Hebrew Translation: and God said Let the earth bring out living things [according] to kind, livestock and creeping things and living things of the earth [according] to kind. and it was so.
Notes:
- ἑρπετὰ better meaning
- difference in Greek lists


Genesis.1.25
English: And God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds and the livestock according to their kinds, and everything that creeps on the ground according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
Greek: καὶ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τὰ θηρία τῆς γῆς κατὰ γένος καὶ τὰ κτήνη κατὰ γένος καὶ πάντα τὰ ἑρπετὰ τῆς γῆς κατὰ γένος αὐτῶν. καὶ εἶδεν ὁ θεὸς ὅτι καλά.
Greek Translation: and God made the wild animals of the earth according to kind and the herds according to kind and all the animals of the earth according to their kinds. and God saw that [it was] good.
Hebrew: וַיַּ֣עַשׂ אֱלֹהִים֩ אֶת־חַיַּ֨ת הָאָ֜רֶץ לְמִינָ֗הּ וְאֶת־הַבְּהֵמָה֙ לְמִינָ֔הּ וְאֵ֛ת כָּל־רֶ֥מֶשׂ הָֽאֲדָמָ֖ה לְמִינֵ֑הוּ וַיַּ֥רְא אֱלֹהִ֖ים כִּי־טֽוֹב׃
Hebrew Translation: and God made the wild things of the earth [according] to its kind and the domestic things [according] to its kind and all of the creeping thing[s] of the ground [according] to its kind. and God saw that [it was] good.
Notes:
-

Genesis.1.26
English: Then God said, “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. And let them have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over the livestock and over all the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.”
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός Ποιήσωμεν ἄνθρωπον κατ᾿ εἰκόνα ἡμετέραν καὶ καθ᾿ ὁμοίωσιν, καὶ ἀρχέτωσαν τῶν ἰχθύων τῆς θαλάσσης καὶ τῶν πετεινῶν τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ τῶν κτηνῶν καὶ πάσης τῆς γῆς καὶ πάντων τῶν ἑρπετῶν τῶν ἑρπόντων ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς.
Greek Translation: and God said We could make man according to our image and according to [our] likeness, and let them rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the heavens and the livestock and all of the earth and all of the creeping animals on the earth.
Hebrew:וַיֹּ֣אמֶר אֱלֹהִ֔ים נַֽעֲשֶׂ֥ה אָדָ֛ם בְּצַלְמֵ֖נוּ כִּדְמוּתֵ֑נוּ וְיִרְדּוּ֩ בִדְגַ֨ת הַיָּ֜ם וּבְע֣וֹף הַשָּׁמַ֗יִם וּבַבְּהֵמָה֙ וּבְכָל־הָאָ֔רֶץ וּבְכָל־הָרֶ֖מֶשׂ הָֽרֹמֵ֥שׂ עַל־הָאָֽרֶץ׃
Hebrew Translation: and God said Let us make human kind in our image according to our likeness and let them rule the fish of the sea and the bird of the heavens and the domestic animals and all of the earth and all of the creeping things that creep of the earth.
Notes:
- subjunctive ποιέω
- pattern?
- image isn't definite
- many sources insert the wild animals

Genesis.1.27
English: So God created man in his own image,	in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them.
Greek: καὶ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν ἄνθρωπον, κατ᾿ εἰκόνα θεοῦ ἐποίησεν αὐτόν, ἄρσεν καὶ θῆλυ ἐποίησεν αὐτούς.
Greek Translation: and God made man, according to an image of God He made him, man and womanly He made them.
Hebrew:וַיִּבְרָ֨א אֱלֹהִ֤ים ׀ אֶת־הָֽאָדָם֙ בְּצַלְמ֔וֹ בְּצֶ֥לֶם אֱלֹהִ֖ים בָּרָ֣א אֹת֑וֹ זָכָ֥ר וּנְקֵבָ֖ה בָּרָ֥א אֹתָֽם׃
Hebrew Translation: and God created man, in His image. and in the image of God He created him [man]. male and female He created them
Notes:
- image isn't definite!
- noun vs adj of man and woman
- different creation verb
- awkward ending construction; accents solve image issue?

Genesis.1.28
English: And God blessed them. And God said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing that moves on the earth.”
Greek: καὶ ηὐλόγησεν αὐτοὺς ὁ θεὸς λέγων Αὐξάνεσθε καὶ πληθύνεσθε καὶ πληρώσατε τὴν γῆν καὶ κατακυριεύσατε αὐτῆς καὶ ἄρχετε τῶν ἰχθύων τῆς θαλάσσης καὶ τῶν πετεινῶν τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ πάντων τῶν κτηνῶν καὶ πάσης τῆς γῆς καὶ πάντων τῶν ἑρπετῶν τῶν ἑρπόντων ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς.
Greek Translation: and God blessed them saying Increase and multiply and fill the earth and exercise dominion over it and rule the fish of the sea and the birds of the sky and all of the flocks and all of the earth and all of the creeping animals on the earth.
Hebrew:וַיְבָ֣רֶךְ אֹתָם֮ אֱלֹהִים֒ וַיֹּ֨אמֶר לָהֶ֜ם אֱלֹהִ֗ים פְּר֥וּ וּרְב֛וּ וּמִלְא֥וּ אֶת־הָאָ֖רֶץ וְכִבְשֻׁ֑הָ וּרְד֞וּ בִּדְגַ֤ת הַיָּם֙ וּבְע֣וֹף הַשָּׁמַ֔יִם וּבְכָל־חַיָּ֖ה הָֽרֹמֶ֥שֶׂת עַל־הָאָֽרֶץ׃
Hebrew Translation: and God blessed them and God said to them Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and rule over the fish of the sea and over the bird[s] of the heavens and over all of the creeping things on the earth.
Notes:
- how should we handle quotes
- the priestly writer is slipping up (compare to 26)


Genesis.1.29
English: And God said, “Behold, I have given you every plant yielding seed that is on the face of all the earth, and every tree with seed in its fruit. You shall have them for food.
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός Ἰδοὺ δέδωκα ὑμῖν πᾶν χόρτον σπόριμον σπεῖρον σπέρμα, ὅ ἐστιν ἐπάνω πάσης τῆς γῆς, καὶ πᾶν ξύλον, ὃ ἔχει ἐν ἑαυτῷ καρπὸν σπέρματος σπορίμου. ὑμῖν ἔσται εἰς βρῶσιν.
Greek Translation: and God said Look I have given to you all grass yielding seed, all which is upon the earth, and all trees, which have in itself seed yielding fruit. It will be to you as food.
Hebrew:וַיֹּ֣אמֶר אֱלֹהִ֗ים הִנֵּה֩ נָתַ֨תִּי לָכֶ֜ם אֶת־כָּל־עֵ֣שֶׂב ׀ זֹרֵ֣עַ זֶ֗רַע אֲשֶׁר֙ עַל־פְּנֵ֣י כָל־הָאָ֔רֶץ וְאֶת־כָּל־הָעֵ֛ץ אֲשֶׁר־בּ֥וֹ פְרִי־עֵ֖ץ זֹרֵ֣עַ זָ֑רַע לָכֶ֥ם יִֽהְיֶ֖ה לְאָכְלָֽה׃
Hebrew Translation: and God said Here I have given you all the plants yielding seed all which is on the face of the earth, and all of the trees which produces seed bearing fruit. It will be for food.
Notes:
-

Genesis.1.30
English: And to every beast of the earth and to every bird of the heavens and to everything that creeps on the earth, everything that has the breath of life, I have given every green plant for food.” And it was so.
Greek: καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς θηρίοις τῆς γῆς καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς πετεινοῖς τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ παντὶ ἑρπετῷ τῷ ἕρποντι ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ὃ ἔχει ἐν ἑαυτῷ ψυχὴν ζωῆς, πάντα χόρτον χλωρὸν εἰς βρῶσιν. καὶ ἐγένετο οὕτως.
Greek Translation: and to all the wild animals of the earth and to all the birds of the sky and to all the creeping animals of the earth, [all] whom have the spirit of life in them, all the green grass [will be] for food. And it came to be like this.
Hebrew: וּֽלְכָל־חַיַּ֣ת הָ֠אָרֶץ וּלְכָל־ע֨וֹף הַשָּׁמַ֜יִם וּלְכֹ֣ל ׀ רוֹמֵ֣שׂ עַל־הָאָ֗רֶץ אֲשֶׁר־בּוֹ֙ נֶ֣פֶשׁ חַיָּ֔ה אֶת־כָּל־יֶ֥רֶק עֵ֖שֶׂב לְאָכְלָ֑ה וַֽיְהִי־כֵֽן׃
Hebrew Translation: and all of the wild animals of the earth and all the bird of the sky and all the creeping things on the earth, [all] which in it [is] a living breath, all green plants [I have given] for food. and it was so.
Notes:
-

Genesis.1.31
English: And God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.
Greek: καὶ εἶδεν ὁ θεὸς τὰ πάντα, ὅσα ἐποίησεν, καὶ ἰδοὺ καλὰ λίαν. καὶ ἐγένετο ἑσπέρα καὶ ἐγένετο πρωί, ἡμέρα ἕκτη.
Greek Translation: and God saw all the things, as much as He made, and look [it was] very good. and night came to be and it was morning, sixth day.
Hebrew:וַיַּ֤רְא אֱלֹהִים֙ אֶת־כָּל־אֲשֶׁ֣ר עָשָׂ֔ה וְהִנֵּה־ט֖וֹב מְאֹ֑ד וַֽיְהִי־עֶ֥רֶב וַֽיְהִי־בֹ֖קֶר י֥וֹם הַשִּׁשִּֽׁי׃ פ
Hebrew Translation: and God saw all which he made and indeed [it was] very good. and there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.
Notes:
-


Genesis.2.1
English: Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.
Greek: Καὶ συνετελέσθησαν ὁ οὐρανὸς καὶ ἡ γῆ καὶ πᾶς ὁ κόσμος αὐτῶν.
Greek Translation: and heaven was finished also the earth and all the order of them.
Hebrew: וַיְכֻלּ֛וּ הַשָּׁמַ֥יִם וְהָאָ֖רֶץ וְכָל־צְבָאָֽם׃
Hebrew Translation: and the heavens and the earth were finished and all of the hosts.
Notes:
-


Genesis.2.2
English: And on the seventh day God finished his work that he had done, and he rested on the seventh day from all his work that he had done.
Greek: καὶ συνετέλεσεν ὁ θεὸς ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ ἕκτῃ τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ, ἃ ἐποίησεν, καὶ κατέπαυσεν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ ἑβδόμῃ ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν ἔργων αὐτοῦ, ὧν ἐποίησεν.
Greek Translation: and God finished His work on the seventh day, which he did, and He rested on the seventh day from all of His the works, which he did.
Hebrew: וַיְכַ֤ל אֱלֹהִים֙ בַּיּ֣וֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִ֔י מְלַאכְתּ֖וֹ אֲשֶׁ֣ר עָשָׂ֑ה וַיִּשְׁבֹּת֙ בַּיּ֣וֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִ֔י מִכָּל־מְלַאכְתּ֖וֹ אֲשֶׁ֥ר עָשָֽׂה׃
Hebrew Translation: and God finished on the seventh day His work which He did and He rested on the seventh day from all of His work which He did.
Notes:
-

Genesis.2.3
English: So God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on it God rested from all his work that he had done in creation.
Greek: καὶ ηὐλόγησεν ὁ θεὸς τὴν ἡμέραν τὴν ἑβδόμην καὶ ἡγίασεν αὐτήν, ὅτι ἐν αὐτῇ κατέπαυσεν ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν ἔργων αὐτοῦ, ὧν ἤρξατο ὁ θεὸς ποιῆσαι.
Greek Translation: and God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on it He rested from all of his works, which God had begun to make.
Hebrew: וַיְבָ֤רֶךְ אֱלֹהִים֙ אֶת־י֣וֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִ֔י וַיְקַדֵּ֖שׁ אֹת֑וֹ כִּ֣י ב֤וֹ שָׁבַת֙ מִכָּל־מְלַאכְתּ֔וֹ אֲשֶׁר־בָּרָ֥א אֱלֹהִ֖ים לַעֲשֽׂוֹת׃
Hebrew Translation: and God blessed the seventh day and consecrated it because on it He rested from all of His work which God made in creating.
Notes:
- weird ending verbs

Genesis.2.4
English: These are the generations of the heavens and the earth when they were created, in the day that the LORD God made the earth and the heavens.
Greek: Αὕτη ἡ βίβλος γενέσεως οὐρανοῦ καὶ γῆς, ὅτε ἐγένετο, ᾗ ἡμέρᾳ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν
Greek Translation: this [is] the record of the generations of heaven and of earth, when it came to be, from the day God made heaven and the earth
Hebrew: אֵ֣לֶּה תוֹלְד֧וֹת הַשָּׁמַ֛יִם וְהָאָ֖רֶץ בְּהִבָּֽרְאָ֑ם בְּי֗וֹם עֲשׂ֛וֹת יְהוָ֥ה אֱלֹהִ֖ים אֶ֥רֶץ וְשָׁמָֽיִם׃
Hebrew Translation: These [are] generations of the heavens and the earth at their creation, from the day the Lord God made the heavens and the earth.
Notes:
-

Genesis.2.5
English: When no bush of the field was yet in the land and no small plant of the field had yet sprung up—for the LORD God had not caused it to rain on the land, and there was no man to work the ground,
Greek: καὶ πᾶν χλωρὸν ἀγροῦ πρὸ τοῦ γενέσθαι ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς καὶ πάντα χόρτον ἀγροῦ πρὸ τοῦ ἀνατεῖλαι· οὐ γὰρ ἔβρεξεν ὁ θεὸς ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν, καὶ ἄνθρωπος οὐκ ἦν ἐργάζεσθαι τὴν γῆν,
Greek Translation: and before they existed [God made] every green thing of the field of the earth and before the growth of all the grass of the field, for God had not made it rain on the earth, and there was no man to work the ground,
Hebrew:  וְכֹ֣ל ׀ שִׂ֣יחַ הַשָּׂדֶ֗ה טֶ֚רֶם יִֽהְיֶ֣ה בָאָ֔רֶץ וְכָל־עֵ֥שֶׂב הַשָּׂדֶ֖ה טֶ֣רֶם יִצְמָ֑ח כִּי֩ לֹ֨א הִמְטִ֜יר יְהוָ֤ה אֱלֹהִים֙ עַל־הָאָ֔רֶץ וְאָדָ֣ם אַ֔יִן לַֽעֲבֹ֖ד אֶת־הָֽאֲדָמָֽה׃
Hebrew Translation: and every bush of the field before it was in the earth and every plant of the field before it grew because the Lord God did not make it rain over the earth and there was no man to work the land.
Notes:
- articular infinitives

Genesis.2.6
English: and a mist was going up from the land and was watering the whole face of the ground—
Greek: πηγὴ δὲ ἀνέβαινεν ἐκ τῆς γῆς καὶ ἐπότιζεν πᾶν τὸ πρόσωπον τῆς γῆς.
Greek Translation: water was rising up out from the ground and was watering all the face of the earth-
Hebrew: וְאֵ֖ד יַֽעֲלֶ֣ה מִן־הָאָ֑רֶץ וְהִשְׁקָ֖ה אֶֽת־כָּל־פְּנֵֽי־הָֽאֲדָמָֽה׃
Hebrew Translation: and water was rising up from the earth and watering all of the face of the ground
Notes:
-

Genesis.2.7
English: then the LORD God formed the man of dust from the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living creature.
Greek: καὶ ἔπλασεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν ἄνθρωπον χοῦν ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς καὶ ἐνεφύσησεν εἰς τὸ πρόσωπον αὐτοῦ πνοὴν ζωῆς, καὶ ἐγένετο ὁ ἄνθρωπος εἰς ψυχὴν ζῶσαν.
Greek Translation: and God formed man of dust from the earth and breathed into his face the breath of life, and man became a live being.
Hebrew: וַיִּיצֶר֩ יְהוָ֨ה אֱלֹהִ֜ים אֶת־הָֽאָדָ֗ם עָפָר֙ מִן־הָ֣אֲדָמָ֔ה וַיִּפַּ֥ח בְּאַפָּ֖יו נִשְׁמַ֣ת חַיִּ֑ים וַֽיְהִ֥י הָֽאָדָ֖ם לְנֶ֥פֶשׁ חַיָּֽה׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God made man [with] dust from the ground and He breathed in the nostrils the breath of life and the man was a living creature.
Notes:
- absolute man and dust
- nostrils/face

Genesis.2.8
English: And the LORD God planted a garden in Eden, in the east, and there he put the man whom he had formed.
Greek: Καὶ ἐφύτευσεν κύριος ὁ θεὸς παράδεισον ἐν Εδεμ κατὰ ἀνατολὰς καὶ ἔθετο ἐκεῖ τὸν ἄνθρωπον, ὃν ἔπλασεν.
Greek Translation: and the Lord God planted a garden in Eden around the east and He put man there, which He formed.
Hebrew: וַיִּטַּ֞ע יְהוָ֧ה אֱלֹהִ֛ים גַּן־בְעֵ֖דֶן מִקֶּ֑דֶם וַיָּ֣שֶׂם שָׁ֔ם אֶת־הָֽאָדָ֖ם אֲשֶׁ֥ר יָצָֽר׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God planted a garden at Eden from the east and He put man there who He formed.
Notes:
-


Genesis.2.9
English: And out of the ground the LORD God made to spring up every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food. The tree of life was in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
Greek: καὶ ἐξανέτειλεν ὁ θεὸς ἔτι ἐκ τῆς γῆς πᾶν ξύλον ὡραῖον εἰς ὅρασιν καὶ καλὸν εἰς βρῶσιν καὶ τὸ ξύλον τῆς ζωῆς ἐν μέσῳ τῷ παραδείσῳ καὶ τὸ ξύλον τοῦ εἰδέναι γνωστὸν καλοῦ καὶ πονηροῦ.
Greek Translation: and God sprung up every tree pleasant to sight and fine for food and the tree of life in the middle of the garden and the tree of wisdom of good and bad.
Hebrew: וַיַּצְמַ֞ח יְהוָ֤ה אֱלֹהִים֙ מִן־הָ֣אֲדָמָ֔ה כָּל־עֵ֛ץ נֶחְמָ֥ד לְמַרְאֶ֖ה וְט֣וֹב לְמַאֲכָ֑ל וְעֵ֤ץ הַֽחַיִּים֙ בְּת֣וֹךְ הַגָּ֔ן וְעֵ֕ץ הַדַּ֖עַת ט֥וֹב וָרָֽע׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God sprouted up from the earth every tree delightful to see and good for food and the tree of life in the midst of the garden and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
Notes:
- weird syntax with good and evil, conjunctive/disjunctive accents

Genesis.2.10
English: A river flowed out of Eden to water the garden, and there it divided and became four rivers.
Greek: ποταμὸς δὲ ἐκπορεύεται ἐξ Εδεμ ποτίζειν τὸν παράδεισον· ἐκεῖθεν ἀφορίζεται εἰς τέσσαρας ἀρχάς.
Greek Translation: the river went forth out of Eden to water the garden, from there it divided itself into four origins.
Hebrew: וְנָהָרּ֙ יֹצֵ֣א מֵעֵ֔דֶן לְהַשְׁק֖וֹת אֶת־הַגָּ֑ן וּמִשָּׁם֙ יִפָּרֵ֔ד וְהָיָ֖ה לְאַרְבָּעָ֥ה רָאשִֽׁים׃
Hebrew Translation: and a river came out of Eden to water the garden and from there it divided itself and became four new branches.
Notes:
-

Genesis.2.11
English: The name of the first is the Pishon. It is the one that flowed around the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold.
Greek: ὄνομα τῷ ἑνὶ Φισων· οὗτος ὁ κυκλῶν πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν Ευιλατ, ἐκεῖ οὗ ἐστιν τὸ χρυσίον·
Greek Translation: The name of one [is] Pishon. This one is surrounding all the land Havilah, where there is gold.
Hebrew: שֵׁ֥ם הָֽאֶחָ֖ד פִּישׁ֑וֹן ה֣וּא הַסֹּבֵ֗ב אֵ֚ת כָּל־אֶ֣רֶץ הַֽחֲוִילָ֔ה אֲשֶׁר־שָׁ֖ם הַזָּהָֽב׃
Hebrew Translation: The name of one [is] Pishon. It surrounded all the land of Havilah, where there is gold.
Notes:
-

Genesis.2.12
English: And the gold of that land is good; bdellium and onyx stone are there.
Greek: τὸ δὲ χρυσίον τῆς γῆς ἐκείνης καλόν· καὶ ἐκεῖ ἐστιν ὁ ἄνθραξ καὶ ὁ λίθος ὁ πράσινος.
Greek Translation: the gold of that land [is] good, and the coal is there and the stone and the light green thing (bdellium).
Hebrew: וּֽזֲהַ֛ב הָאָ֥רֶץ הַהִ֖וא ט֑וֹב שָׁ֥ם הַבְּדֹ֖לַח וְאֶ֥בֶן הַשֹּֽׁהַם׃
Hebrew Translation: and the gold of that land [is] good, there [is] bdellium and stone and onyx.
Notes:
- light green thing

Genesis.2.13
English: The name of the second river is the Gihon. It is the one that flowed around the whole land of Cush.
Greek: καὶ ὄνομα τῷ ποταμῷ τῷ δευτέρῳ Γηων· οὗτος ὁ κυκλῶν πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν Αἰθιοπίας.
Greek Translation: and the name of the second river [is] Gihon. This one is surrounding all the land of Ethiopia(Cush).
Hebrew: וְשֵֽׁם־הַנָּהָ֥ר הַשֵּׁנִ֖י גִּיח֑וֹן ה֣וּא הַסּוֹבֵ֔ב אֵ֖ת כָּל־אֶ֥רֶץ כּֽוּשׁ׃
Hebrew Translation: and the name of the second river [is] Gihon. It surrounded all the land of Cush.
Notes:
-
Genesis.2.14
English: And the name of the third river is the Tigris, which flows east of Assyria. And the fourth river is the Euphrates.
Greek: καὶ ὁ ποταμὸς ὁ τρίτος Τίγρις· οὗτος ὁ πορευόμενος κατέναντι Ἀσσυρίων. ὁ δὲ ποταμὸς ὁ τέταρτος, οὗτος Εὐφράτης.
Greek Translation: and the third river [is] Tigris. This one is going near Assyria. and the fourth river, this [is] Euphrates.
Hebrew: וְשֵׁ֨ם הַנָּהָ֤ר הַשְּׁלִישִׁי֙ חִדֶּ֔קֶל ה֥וּא הַֽהֹלֵ֖ךְ קִדְמַ֣ת אַשּׁ֑וּר וְהַנָּהָ֥ר הָֽרְבִיעִ֖י ה֥וּא פְרָֽת׃
Hebrew Translation: and the name of the third river [is] Tigris. It goes east of Assyria. and the fourth river, it [is] Euphrates.
Notes:
- totally different set up in both languages

Genesis.2.15
English: The LORD God took the man and put him in the garden of Eden to work it and keep it.
Greek: Καὶ ἔλαβεν κύριος ὁ θεὸς τὸν ἄνθρωπον, ὃν ἔπλασεν, καὶ ἔθετο αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ παραδείσῳ ἐργάζεσθαι αὐτὸν καὶ φυλάσσειν.
Greek Translation: and the Lord God took the man, whom he formed, and He put him in the garden to work it and to guard [it].
Hebrew: וַיִּקַּ֛ח יְהוָ֥ה אֱלֹהִ֖ים אֶת־הָֽאָדָ֑ם וַיַּנִּחֵ֣הוּ בְגַן־עֵ֔דֶן לְעָבְדָ֖הּ וּלְשָׁמְרָֽהּ׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God took the man and put him in the garden of Eden to work her and to keep her
Notes:
-

Genesis.2.16
English: And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, “You may surely eat of every tree of the garden,
Greek: καὶ ἐνετείλατο κύριος ὁ θεὸς τῷ Αδαμ λέγων Ἀπὸ παντὸς ξύλου τοῦ ἐν τῷ παραδείσῳ βρώσει φάγῃ,
Greek Translation: and the Lord God commanded Adam saying, from every tree in the food garden you will eat.
Hebrew: וַיְצַו֙ יְהוָ֣ה אֱלֹהִ֔ים עַל־הָֽאָדָ֖ם לֵאמֹ֑ר מִכֹּ֥ל עֵֽץ־הַגָּ֖ן אָכֹ֥ל תֹּאכֵֽל׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God commanded the man saying, you will surely eat from every tree of the garden.
Notes:
-

Genesis.2.17
English: but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall surely die.”
Greek: ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ ξύλου τοῦ γινώσκειν καλὸν καὶ πονηρόν, οὐ φάγεσθε ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ· ᾗ δ᾿ ἂν ἡμέρᾳ φάγητε ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ, θανάτῳ ἀποθανεῖσθε.
Greek Translation: but from the tree of knowing good and evil, you will not eat of it, for, if so, the day which you eat from it, you will surely die.
Hebrew:וּמֵעֵ֗ץ הַדַּ֙עַת֙ ט֣וֹב וָרָ֔ע לֹ֥א תֹאכַ֖ל מִמֶּ֑נּוּ כִּ֗י בְּי֛וֹם אֲכָלְךָ֥ מִמֶּ֖נּוּ מ֥וֹת תָּמֽוּת׃
Hebrew Translation: but from the tree of knowledge of good and evil, you will not eat from it, because on the day you eat from it you will surely die.
Notes:
-

Genesis.2.18
English: Then the LORD God said, “It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him a helper fit for him.”
Greek: Καὶ εἶπεν κύριος ὁ θεός Οὐ καλὸν εἶναι τὸν ἄνθρωπον μόνον· ποιήσωμεν αὐτῷ βοηθὸν κατ᾿ αὐτόν.
Greek Translation: and the Lord God said [It is] not good [for] man to be alone, I will make a helper from him according to him.
Hebrew:וַיֹּ֙אמֶר֙ יְהוָ֣ה אֱלֹהִ֔ים לֹא־ט֛וֹב הֱי֥וֹת הָֽאָדָ֖ם לְבַדּ֑וֹ אֶֽעֱשֶׂהּ־לּ֥וֹ עֵ֖זֶר כְּנֶגְדּֽוֹ׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God said [it is] not good [for] man to be alone. I will make for him a helper as his partner.
Notes:
- subjunctive in Greek?

Genesis.2.19
English: Now out of the ground the LORD God had formed every beast of the field and every bird of the heavens and brought them to the man to see what he would call them. And whatever the man called every living creature, that was its name.
Greek: καὶ ἔπλασεν ὁ θεὸς ἔτι ἐκ τῆς γῆς πάντα τὰ θηρία τοῦ ἀγροῦ καὶ πάντα τὰ πετεινὰ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ ἤγαγεν αὐτὰ πρὸς τὸν Αδαμ ἰδεῖν, τί καλέσει αὐτά, καὶ πᾶν, ὃ ἐὰν ἐκάλεσεν αὐτὸ Αδαμ ψυχὴν ζῶσαν, τοῦτο ὄνομα αὐτοῦ.
Greek Translation: and still God formed out of the earth all the wild animals of the field and all the birds of the sky and He brought them toward Adam to see, what will you call them, and each which Adam called
Hebrew:וַיִּצֶר֩ יְהוָ֨ה אֱלֹהִ֜ים מִן־הָֽאֲדָמָ֗ה כָּל־חַיַּ֤ת הַשָּׂדֶה֙ וְאֵת֙ כָּל־ע֣וֹף הַשָּׁמַ֔יִם וַיָּבֵא֙ אֶל־הָ֣אָדָ֔ם לִרְא֖וֹת מַה־יִּקְרָא־ל֑וֹ וְכֹל֩ אֲשֶׁ֨ר יִקְרָא־ל֧וֹ הָֽאָדָ֛ם נֶ֥פֶשׁ חַיָּ֖ה ה֥וּא שְׁמֽוֹ׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God formed from the ground every living creature of the field and every bird of the sky and He brought [them] to the man to see what he would call them and whatever the man would call the living creatures [that will be] its name.
Notes:
- weird greek

Genesis.2.20
English: The man gave names to all livestock and to the birds of the heavens and to every beast of the field. But for Adam there was not found a helper fit for him.
Greek: Καὶ ἐκάλεσεν Αδαμ ὀνόματα πᾶσιν τοῖς κτήνεσιν καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς πετεινοῖς τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς θηρίοις τοῦ ἀγροῦ, τῷ δὲ Αδαμ οὐχ εὑρέθη βοηθὸς ὅμοιος αὐτῷ.
Greek Translation and Adam called the names to every animal and to all the birds of the sky and to all the wild animals of the field, but for Adam no helper like him was found.
Hebrew: וַיִּקְרָ֨א הָֽאָדָ֜ם שֵׁמ֗וֹת לְכָל־הַבְּהֵמָה֙ וּלְע֣וֹף הַשָּׁמַ֔יִם וּלְכֹ֖ל חַיַּ֣ת הַשָּׂדֶ֑ה וּלְאָדָ֕ם לֹֽא־מָצָ֥א עֵ֖זֶר כְּנֶגְדּֽוֹ׃
Hebrew Translation: and the man spoke the names for every domestic animal and for the birds of the sky and for every beast of the field but for the man a helper was not found as his partner.
Notes
- in front of?

Genesis.2.21
English: So the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and while he slept took one of his ribs and closed up its place with flesh.
Greek:  καὶ ἐπέβαλεν ὁ θεὸς ἔκστασιν ἐπὶ τὸν Αδαμ, καὶ ὕπνωσεν· καὶ ἔλαβεν μίαν τῶν πλευρῶν αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀνεπλήρωσεν σάρκα ἀντ᾿ αὐτῆς.
Greek Translation: and God threw a distraction at Adam, and He took one of the sides of him and He filled up the body like [it was] before it.
Hebrew:וַיַּפֵּל֩ יְהוָ֨ה אֱלֹהִ֧ים ׀ תַּרְדֵּמָ֛ה עַל־הָאָדָ֖ם וַיִּישָׁ֑ן וַיִּקַּ֗ח אַחַת֙ מִצַּלְעֹתָ֔יו וַיִּסְגֹּ֥ר בָּשָׂ֖ר תַּחְתֶּֽנָּה׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God made sleep fall upon the man and He took one of his ribs from him and He closed flesh around it.
Notes:
- ask Eunice about the weird ending

Genesis.2.22
English: And the rib that the LORD God had taken from the man he made into a woman and brought her to the man.
Greek: καὶ ᾠκοδόμησεν κύριος ὁ θεὸς τὴν πλευράν, ἣν ἔλαβεν ἀπὸ τοῦ Αδαμ, εἰς γυναῖκα καὶ ἤγαγεν αὐτὴν πρὸς τὸν Αδαμ.
Greek Translation: and the Lord God built the side, which He took from Adam, into woman and He brought her close to Adam.
Hebrew: וַיִּבֶן֩ יְהוָ֨ה אֱלֹהִ֧ים ׀ אֶֽת־הַצֵּלָ֛ע אֲשֶׁר־לָקַ֥ח מִן־הָֽאָדָ֖ם לְאִשָּׁ֑ה וַיְבִאֶ֖הָ אֶל־הָֽאָדָֽם׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God made the rib which was taken from the man into woman and He brought her to the man.
Notes:
-
Genesis.2.23
English: then the man said, “This at last is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.”
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν Αδαμ Τοῦτο νῦν ὀστοῦν ἐκ τῶν ὀστέων μου καὶ σὰρξ ἐκ τῆς σαρκός μου· αὕτη κληθήσεται γυνή, ὅτι ἐκ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς αὐτῆς ἐλήμφθη αὕτη.
Greek Translation: and Adam said, now this [is] bone out of my bone and flesh out of my flesh, she will be called woman, because out of man she was taken.
Hebrew: וַיֹּאמֶר֮ הָֽאָדָם֒ זֹ֣את הַפַּ֗עַם עֶ֚צֶם מֵֽעֲצָמַ֔י וּבָשָׂ֖ר מִבְּשָׂרִ֑י לְזֹאת֙ יִקָּרֵ֣א אִשָּׁ֔ה כִּ֥י מֵאִ֖ישׁ לֻֽקֳחָה־זֹּֽאת׃
Hebrew Translation: and the man said now this one [is] bone from my bone and flesh from my flesh and I will call this one woman because she was taken from man
Notes:
-

Genesis.2.24
English: Therefore a man shall leave his father and his mother and hold fast to his wife, and they shall become one flesh.
Greek: ἕνεκεν τούτου καταλείψει ἄνθρωπος τὸν πατέρα αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν μητέρα αὐτοῦ καὶ προσκολληθήσεται πρὸς τὴν γυναῖκα αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἔσονται οἱ δύο εἰς σάρκα μίαν.
Greek Translation: because of this, man will leave his father and his mother and he will be stuck toward his wife, and both will be into one body.
Hebrew: עַל־כֵּן֙ יַֽעֲזָב־אִ֔ישׁ אֶת־אָבִ֖יו וְאֶת־אִמּ֑וֹ וְדָבַ֣ק בְּאִשְׁתּ֔וֹ וְהָי֖וּ לְבָשָׂ֥ר אֶחָֽד׃
Hebrew Translation: thus a man will leave his father and his mother and he clings to his wife and they are one flesh
Notes:
-

Genesis.2.25
English: And the man and his wife were both naked and were not ashamed.
Greek: καὶ ἦσαν οἱ δύο γυμνοί, ὅ τε Αδαμ καὶ ἡ γυνὴ αὐτοῦ, καὶ οὐκ ᾐσχύνοντο.
Greek Translation: and both were naked, when Adam and his wife were not ashamed.
Hebrew:וַיִּֽהְי֤וּ שְׁנֵיהֶם֙ עֲרוּמִּ֔ים הָֽאָדָ֖ם וְאִשְׁתּ֑וֹ וְלֹ֖א יִתְבֹּשָֽׁשׁוּ׃
Hebrew Translation: and they were both naked, the man and his wife were not ashamed.
Notes:
- switching impf and perf

Genesis.3.1
English: Now the serpent was more crafty than any other beast of the field that the LORD God had made. He said to the woman, “Did God actually say, ‘You shall not eat of any tree in the garden’?”
Greek: Ὁ δὲ ὄφις ἦν φρονιμώτατος πάντων τῶν θηρίων τῶν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ὧν ἐποίησεν κύριος ὁ θεός· καὶ εἶπεν ὁ ὄφις τῇ γυναικί Τί ὅτι εἶπεν ὁ θεός Οὐ μὴ φάγητε ἀπὸ παντὸς ξύλου τοῦ ἐν τῷ παραδείσῳ;
Greek Translation: The snake was the most prudent of all of the wild animals in the garden, which the Lord God made, and the snake said to the woman "What did God say, 'You will not eat of any tree in the garden'?"
Hebrew: וְהַנָּחָשׁ֙ הָיָ֣ה עָר֔וּם מִכֹּל֙ חַיַּ֣ת הַשָּׂדֶ֔ה אֲשֶׁ֥ר עָשָׂ֖ה יְהוָ֣ה אֱלֹהִ֑ים וַיֹּ֙אמֶר֙ אֶל־הָ֣אִשָּׁ֔ה אַ֚ף כִּֽי־אָמַ֣ר אֱלֹהִ֔ים לֹ֣א תֹֽאכְל֔וּ מִכֹּ֖ל עֵ֥ץ הַגָּֽן׃
Hebrew Translation: and the serpent was crafty beyond every animal of the field which the Lord God made, and he said to the woman, "Did God really say 'You will not eat from any tree in the garden'?""
Notes:
- aorist subjunctive verb of eating, future like revelations? pair with future next verse

Genesis.3.2
English: And the woman said to the serpent, “We may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden,
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν ἡ γυνὴ τῷ ὄφει Ἀπὸ καρποῦ ξύλου τοῦ παραδείσου φαγόμεθα,
Greek Translation: and the woman said to the snake "We will eat from the fruit of the tree[s] of the garden
Hebrew:וַתֹּ֥אמֶר הָֽאִשָּׁ֖ה אֶל־הַנָּחָ֑שׁ מִפְּרִ֥י עֵֽץ־הַגָּ֖ן נֹאכֵֽל׃
Hebrew Translation: and the woman said to the serpent "We will eat of the fruit of the tree of the garden
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.3
English: but God said, ‘You shall not eat of the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden, neither shall you touch it, lest you die.’”
Greek: ἀπὸ δὲ καρποῦ τοῦ ξύλου, ὅ ἐστιν ἐν μέσῳ τοῦ παραδείσου, εἶπεν ὁ θεός Οὐ φάγεσθε ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ οὐδὲ μὴ ἅψησθε αὐτοῦ, ἵνα μὴ ἀποθάνητε.
Greek Translation: but from the fruit of the tree which is in the middle of the garden," God said, "we will not eat from it and not touch it, so that we do not die."
Hebrew:וּמִפְּרִ֣י הָעֵץ֮ אֲשֶׁ֣ר בְּתוֹךְ־הַגָּן֒ אָמַ֣ר אֱלֹהִ֗ים לֹ֤א תֹֽאכְלוּ֙ מִמֶּ֔נּוּ וְלֹ֥א תִגְּע֖וּ בּ֑וֹ פֶּן־תְּמֻתֽוּן׃
Hebrew Translation: but from the fruit of the tree which is in the middle of the garden," God said, "you will not eat from it and not touch it lest you will die."
Notes:
- subjunctive switching

Genesis.3.4
English: But the serpent said to the woman, “You will not surely die.
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν ὁ ὄφις τῇ γυναικί Οὐ θανάτῳ ἀποθανεῖσθε
Greek Translation: and the snake said to the woman "surely you will not die."
Hebrew:וַיֹּ֥אמֶר הַנָּחָ֖שׁ אֶל־הָֽאִשָּׁ֑ה לֹֽא־מ֖וֹת תְּמֻתֽוּן׃
Hebrew Translation: and the serpent said to the woman, "surely you will not die"
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.5
English: For God knows that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil.”
Greek: ᾔδει γὰρ ὁ θεὸς ὅτι ἐν ᾗ ἂν ἡμέρᾳ φάγητε ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ, διανοιχθήσονται ὑμῶν οἱ ὀφθαλμοί, καὶ ἔσεσθε ὡς θεοὶ γινώσκοντες καλὸν καὶ πονηρόν.
Greek Translation: for God has known that on the day you will eat from it, your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God knowing good and evil."
Hebrew: כִּ֚י יֹדֵ֣עַ אֱלֹהִ֔ים כִּ֗י בְּיוֹם֙ אֲכָלְכֶ֣ם מִמֶּ֔נּוּ וְנִפְקְח֖וּ עֵֽינֵיכֶ֑ם וִהְיִיתֶם֙ כֵּֽאלֹהִ֔ים יֹדְעֵ֖י ט֥וֹב וָרָֽע׃
Hebrew Translation: for God knows that on the day you are to eat of it and your eyes will be opened and you will be like God knowing good and evil."
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.6
English: So when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired to make one wise, she took of its fruit and ate, and she also gave some to her husband who was with her, and he ate.
Greek: καὶ εἶδεν ἡ γυνὴ ὅτι καλὸν τὸ ξύλον εἰς βρῶσιν καὶ ὅτι ἀρεστὸν τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς ἰδεῖν καὶ ὡραῖόν ἐστιν τοῦ κατανοῆσαι, καὶ λαβοῦσα τοῦ καρποῦ αὐτοῦ ἔφαγεν· καὶ ἔδωκεν καὶ τῷ ἀνδρὶ αὐτῆς μετ᾿ αὐτῆς, καὶ ἔφαγον.
Greek Translation: and the woman saw that the tree [was] good for food and that to see it [was] delightful to the eyes and it was good to understand and taking the fruit of it she ate, and she gave also to her husband who was with her, and he ate.
Hebrew:וַתֵּ֣רֶא הָֽאִשָּׁ֡ה כִּ֣י טוֹב֩ הָעֵ֨ץ לְמַאֲכָ֜ל וְכִ֧י תַֽאֲוָה־ה֣וּא לָעֵינַ֗יִם וְנֶחְמָ֤ד הָעֵץ֙ לְהַשְׂכִּ֔יל וַתִּקַּ֥ח מִפִּרְי֖וֹ וַתֹּאכַ֑ל וַתִּתֵּ֧ן גַּם־לְאִישָׁ֛הּ עִמָּ֖הּ וַיֹּאכַֽל׃
Hebrew Translation: and the woman saw that the tree [was] good as food and because it [was] delightful to the eyes and desiring the tree to understand she took the fruit from it and ate, and she gave also to her husband who [was] with her and he ate.
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.7
English: Then the eyes of both were opened, and they knew that they were naked. And they sewed fig leaves together and made themselves loincloths.
Greek: καὶ διηνοίχθησαν οἱ ὀφθαλμοὶ τῶν δύο, καὶ ἔγνωσαν ὅτι γυμνοὶ ἦσαν, καὶ ἔρραψαν φύλλα συκῆς καὶ ἐποίησαν ἑαυτοῖς περιζώματα.
Greek Translation: and both of their eyes were opened, and they knew that they were naked, and they sewed the leaves of a fig tree and made coverings for themselves.
Hebrew:וַתִּפָּקַ֙חְנָה֙ עֵינֵ֣י שְׁנֵיהֶ֔ם וַיֵּ֣דְע֔וּ כִּ֥י עֵֽירֻמִּ֖ם הֵ֑ם וַֽיִּתְפְּרוּ֙ עֲלֵ֣ה תְאֵנָ֔ה וַיַּעֲשׂ֥וּ לָהֶ֖ם חֲגֹרֹֽת׃
Hebrew Translation: and both of their eyes were opened and they knew that they [were] naked, and they sewed the leaves of a fig tree and made girdles for themselves.
Notes:
- naked is imperfect

Genesis.3.8
English: And they heard the sound of the LORD God walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and the man and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God among the trees of the garden.
Greek: Καὶ ἤκουσαν τὴν φωνὴν κυρίου τοῦ θεοῦ περιπατοῦντος ἐν τῷ παραδείσῳ τὸ δειλινόν, καὶ ἐκρύβησαν ὅ τε Αδαμ καὶ ἡ γυνὴ αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ προσώπου κυρίου τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν μέσῳ τοῦ ξύλου τοῦ παραδείσου.
Greek Translation: and they heard the sound of the Lord God walking in the afternoon in the garden, and the hid both the man and his wife from the face of the Lord God in the middle of the tree[s] of the garden.
Hebrew:וַֽיִּשְׁמְע֞וּ אֶת־ק֨וֹל יְהוָ֧ה אֱלֹהִ֛ים מִתְהַלֵּ֥ךְ בַּגָּ֖ן לְר֣וּחַ הַיּ֑וֹם וַיִּתְחַבֵּ֨א הָֽאָדָ֜ם וְאִשְׁתּ֗וֹ מִפְּנֵי֙ יְהוָ֣ה אֱלֹהִ֔ים בְּת֖וֹךְ עֵ֥ץ הַגָּֽן׃
Hebrew Translation: and they heard the sound of the Lord God walking back and forth in the breeze of the afternoon and the man and the woman hid from the face of the Lord God in the middle of the tree[s] of the garden.
Notes:
- same word as spirit

Genesis.3.9
English: But the LORD God called to the man and said to him, “Where are you?”
Greek: καὶ ἐκάλεσεν κύριος ὁ θεὸς τὸν Αδαμ καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ Αδαμ, ποῦ εἶ;
Greek Translation: and the Lord God called Adam and said to Adam, "Where are you?"
Hebrew: וַיִּקְרָ֛א יְהוָ֥ה אֱלֹהִ֖ים אֶל־הָֽאָדָ֑ם וַיֹּ֥אמֶר ל֖וֹ אַיֶּֽכָּה׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God called to Adam saying to him "Where are you?"
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.10
English: And he said, “I heard the sound of you in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid myself.”
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ Τὴν φωνήν σου ἤκουσα περιπατοῦντος ἐν τῷ παραδείσῳ καὶ ἐφοβήθην, ὅτι γυμνός εἰμι, καὶ ἐκρύβην.
Greek Translation: and he said to him "I heard the sound of you walking in the garden and I was frightened, because I am naked, and I was hidden"
Hebrew: וַיֹּ֕אמֶר אֶת־קֹלְךָ֥ שָׁמַ֖עְתִּי בַּגָּ֑ן וָאִירָ֛א כִּֽי־עֵירֹ֥ם אָנֹ֖כִי וָאֵחָבֵֽא׃
Hebrew Translation: and he said "I heard your sound in the garden and I was afraid because [I was] naked and I hid myself."
Notes:
- why passive

Genesis.3.11
English: He said, “Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten of the tree of which I commanded you not to eat?”
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ Τίς ἀνήγγειλέν σοι ὅτι γυμνὸς εἶ; μὴ ἀπὸ τοῦ ξύλου, οὗ ἐνετειλάμην σοι τούτου μόνου μὴ φαγεῖν ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ, ἔφαγες;
Greek Translation: and He said to me, "Who told you that you are naked? not from the tree, the only one of which I commanded you not to eat, you ate?"
Hebrew: וַיֹּ֕אמֶר מִ֚י הִגִּ֣יד לְךָ֔ כִּ֥י עֵירֹ֖ם אָ֑תָּה הֲמִן־הָעֵ֗ץ אֲשֶׁ֧ר צִוִּיתִ֛יךָ לְבִלְתִּ֥י אֲכָל־מִמֶּ֖נּוּ אָכָֽלְתָּ׃
Hebrew Translation: and He said "who has told you that [you are] naked? from the tree which I commanded you to not eat from it did you eat?"
Notes:
- you is singular

Genesis.3.12
English: The man said, “The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit of the tree, and I ate.”
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν ὁ Αδαμ Ἡ γυνή, ἣν ἔδωκας μετ᾿ ἐμοῦ, αὕτη μοι ἔδωκεν ἀπὸ τοῦ ξύλου, καὶ ἔφαγον.
Greek Translation: and Adam said "The woman, which you gave after me, she gave to me from the tree, and I ate"
Hebrew:וַיֹּ֖אמֶר הָֽאָדָ֑ם הָֽאִשָּׁה֙ אֲשֶׁ֣ר נָתַ֣תָּה עִמָּדִ֔י הִ֛וא נָֽתְנָה־לִּ֥י מִן־הָעֵ֖ץ וָאֹכֵֽל׃
Hebrew Translation: and said "The woman which you gave with me, she gave to me from the tree and I ate."
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.13
English: Then the LORD God said to the woman, “What is this that you have done?” The woman said, “The serpent deceived me, and I ate.”
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν κύριος ὁ θεὸς τῇ γυναικί Τί τοῦτο ἐποίησας; καὶ εἶπεν ἡ γυνή Ὁ ὄφις ἠπάτησέν με, καὶ ἔφαγον.
Greek Translation: and the Lord God said to the woman "What is this that you did?" and the woman said "The snake deceived me, and I ate."
Hebrew: וַיֹּ֨אמֶר יְהוָ֧ה אֱלֹהִ֛ים לָאִשָּׁ֖ה מַה־זֹּ֣את עָשִׂ֑ית וַתֹּ֙אמֶר֙ הָֽאִשָּׁ֔ה הַנָּחָ֥שׁ הִשִּׁיאַ֖נִי וָאֹכֵֽל׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God said to the woman "What is this you did?" and the woman said "The serpent deceived me, and I ate."
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.14
English: The LORD God said to the serpent, “Because you have done this, cursed are you above all livestock and above all beasts of the field; on your belly you shall go, and dust you shall eat all the days of your life
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν κύριος ὁ θεὸς τῷ ὄφει Ὅτι ἐποίησας τοῦτο, ἐπικατάρατος σὺ ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν κτηνῶν καὶ ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν θηρίων τῆς γῆς· ἐπὶ τῷ στήθει σου καὶ τῇ κοιλίᾳ πορεύσῃ καὶ γῆν φάγῃ πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας τῆς ζωῆς σου.
Greek Translation: and the Lord God said to the snake "Because of this that you did, you are cursed from all of the livestock and the wild animals of the earth, on your chest and by your stomach you will go and earth you will eat all the days of your life.
Hebrew:וַיֹּאמֶר֩ יְהוָֹ֨ה אֱלֹהִ֥ים ׀ אֶֽל־הַנָּחָשׁ֮ כִּ֣י עָשִׂ֣יתָ זֹּאת֒ אָר֤וּר אַתָּה֙ מִכָּל־הַבְּהֵמָ֔ה וּמִכֹּ֖ל חַיַּ֣ת הַשָּׂדֶ֑ה עַל־גְּחֹנְךָ֣ תֵלֵ֔ךְ וְעָפָ֥ר תֹּאכַ֖ל כָּל־יְמֵ֥י חַיֶּֽיךָ׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God said to the snake "Because of this that you did, you have been cursed above all of the livestock and above all of the wild animals of the field, and on your belly you will go and you will eat dust all of the days of your life.
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.15
English: I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and her offspring; he shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel.”
Greek: καὶ ἔχθραν θήσω ἀνὰ μέσον σου καὶ ἀνὰ μέσον τῆς γυναικὸς καὶ ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ σπέρματός σου καὶ ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ σπέρματος αὐτῆς· αὐτός σου τηρήσει κεφαλήν, καὶ σὺ τηρήσεις αὐτοῦ πτέρναν.
Greek Translation: and I will put hatred in between you and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring, he will guard your head, and you will guard his heel."
Hebrew: וְאֵיבָ֣ה ׀ אָשִׁ֗ית בֵּֽינְךָ֙ וּבֵ֣ין הָֽאִשָּׁ֔ה וּבֵ֥ין זַרְעֲךָ֖ וּבֵ֣ין זַרְעָ֑הּ הוּ֚א יְשׁוּפְךָ֣ רֹ֔אשׁ וְאַתָּ֖ה תְּשׁוּפֶ֥נּוּ עָקֵֽב׃
Hebrew Translation: and I will put enmity between you and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring, he will bruise your head, and you will bruise his heel."
Notes:
- guard vs bruise

Genesis.3.16
English: To the woman he said, “I will surely multiply your pain in childbearing; in pain you shall bring forth children. Your desire shall be contrary to your husband, but he shall rule over you.”
Greek: καὶ τῇ γυναικὶ εἶπεν Πληθύνων πληθυνῶ τὰς λύπας σου καὶ τὸν στεναγμόν σου, ἐν λύπαις τέξῃ τέκνα· καὶ πρὸς τὸν ἄνδρα σου ἡ ἀποστροφή σου, καὶ αὐτός σου κυριεύσει.
Greek Translation: and He said to the woman "I will surely multiply your pain, in pain you will bear children and, and your diversion [will be] against your husband, and he will rule you."
Hebrew: and to the woman He said "I will surely multiply the pain of your childbearing, you will bring forth children in pain, and in your "
Hebrew Translation:
Notes:
- desire/diversion meaning
- how to put together the end of this because I have no idea

Genesis.3.17
English: And to Adam he said, “Because you have listened to the voice of your wife and have eaten of the tree of which I commanded you,	‘You shall not eat of it,’ cursed is the ground because of you; in pain you shall eat of it all the days of your life
Greek: τῷ δὲ Αδαμ εἶπεν Ὅτι ἤκουσας τῆς φωνῆς τῆς γυναικός σου καὶ ἔφαγες ἀπὸ τοῦ ξύλου, οὗ ἐνετειλάμην σοι τούτου μόνου μὴ φαγεῖν ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ, ἐπικατάρατος ἡ γῆ ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις σου· ἐν λύπαις φάγῃ αὐτὴν πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας τῆς ζωῆς σου·
Greek Translation: and to Adam He said "because you heard the sound of the woman and you ate from the tree, which I commanded you not to eat of this only, the ground [is] cursed by your work, in pain you will eat of it all the days of your life
Hebrew:וּלְאָדָ֣ם אָמַ֗ר כִּֽי־שָׁמַעְתָּ֮ לְק֣וֹל אִשְׁתֶּךָ֒ וַתֹּ֙אכַל֙ מִן־הָעֵ֔ץ אֲשֶׁ֤ר צִוִּיתִ֙יךָ֙ לֵאמֹ֔ר לֹ֥א תֹאכַ֖ל מִמֶּ֑נּוּ אֲרוּרָ֤ה הָֽאֲדָמָה֙ בַּֽעֲבוּרֶ֔ךָ בְּעִצָּבוֹן֙ תֹּֽאכֲלֶ֔נָּה כֹּ֖ל יְמֵ֥י חַיֶּֽיךָ׃
Hebrew Translation: and to Adam He said "because you listened to the sound of your wife and ate from the tree which I commanded you saying 'you will not eat from it' the ground is cursed because of you and you will eat through pain all of the days of your life
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.18
English: thorns and thistles it shall bring forth for you; and you shall eat the plants of the field.
Greek: ἀκάνθας καὶ τριβόλους ἀνατελεῖ σοι, καὶ φάγῃ τὸν χόρτον τοῦ ἀγροῦ.
Greek Translation: and it will bring up thorns and thistles to you, and you will eat the grass of the field.
Hebrew:וְק֥וֹץ וְדַרְדַּ֖ר תַּצְמִ֣יחַֽ לָ֑ךְ וְאָכַלְתָּ֖ אֶת־עֵ֥שֶׂב הַשָּׂדֶֽה׃
Hebrew Translation: and thorns and thistles will be brought up to you and you will eat plants of the field."
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.19
English: By the sweat of your face you shall eat bread, till you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken; for you are dust, and to dust you shall return.”
Greek: ἐν ἱδρῶτι τοῦ προσώπου σου φάγῃ τὸν ἄρτον σου ἕως τοῦ ἀποστρέψαι σε εἰς τὴν γῆν, ἐξ ἧς ἐλήμφθης· ὅτι γῆ εἶ καὶ εἰς γῆν ἀπελεύσῃ.
Greek Translation: by the sweat of your face you will eat your bread until you return into the ground, out of it you were taken, because you are earth and into earth you will return."
Hebrew: בְּזֵעַ֤ת אַפֶּ֙יךָ֙ תֹּ֣אכַל לֶ֔חֶם עַ֤ד שֽׁוּבְךָ֙ אֶל־הָ֣אֲדָמָ֔ה כִּ֥י מִמֶּ֖נָּה לֻקָּ֑חְתָּ כִּֽי־עָפָ֣ר אַ֔תָּה וְאֶל־עָפָ֖ר תָּשֽׁוּב׃
Hebrew Translation: by the sweat of your face (nostrils!!!) you will eat bread until you are to return to the earth that you were taken from it, because you are dust and you will return to dust."
Notes:
- nostrils, dual

Genesis.3.20
English: he man called his wife’s name Eve, because she was the mother of all living.
Greek: καὶ ἐκάλεσεν Αδαμ τὸ ὄνομα τῆς γυναικὸς αὐτοῦ Ζωή, ὅτι αὕτη μήτηρ πάντων τῶν ζώντων.
Greek Translation: and Adam called the name of his wife Zoe, because she [was] mother of all of the living.
Hebrew:וַיִּקְרָ֧א הָֽאָדָ֛ם שֵׁ֥ם אִשְׁתּ֖וֹ חַוָּ֑ה כִּ֛י הִ֥וא הָֽיְתָ֖ה אֵ֥ם כָּל־חָֽי׃
Hebrew Translation: and the man called the name of his wife Eve because she was mother of all of the living.
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.21
English: And the LORD God made for Adam and for his wife garments of skins and clothed them.
Greek: Καὶ ἐποίησεν κύριος ὁ θεὸς τῷ Αδαμ καὶ τῇ γυναικὶ αὐτοῦ χιτῶνας δερματίνους καὶ ἐνέδυσεν αὐτούς.
Greek Translation: and the Lord God made for Adam and his wife clothing of skins and both wore them.
Hebrew:וַיַּעַשׂ֩ יְהוָ֨ה אֱלֹהִ֜ים לְאָדָ֧ם וּלְאִשְׁתּ֛וֹ כָּתְנ֥וֹת ע֖וֹר וַיַּלְבִּשֵֽׁם׃ פ
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God made for Adam and for his wife garments of skin and clothed them.
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.22
English: Then the LORD God said, “Behold, the man has become like one of us in knowing good and evil. Now, lest he reach out his hand and take also of the tree of life and eat, and live forever”
Greek: καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός Ἰδοὺ Αδαμ γέγονεν ὡς εἷς ἐξ ἡμῶν τοῦ γινώσκειν καλὸν καὶ πονηρόν, καὶ νῦν μήποτε ἐκτείνῃ τὴν χεῖρα καὶ λάβῃ τοῦ ξύλου τῆς ζωῆς καὶ φάγῃ καὶ ζήσεται εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα.
Greek Translation: and God said "Look, Adam has become like one out of us knowing good and evil, and now lest he will reach out and take of the tree of life and eat and will live into eternity"
Hebrew:וַיֹּ֣אמֶר ׀ יְהוָ֣ה אֱלֹהִ֗ים הֵ֤ן הָֽאָדָם֙ הָיָה֙ כְּאַחַ֣ד מִמֶּ֔נּוּ לָדַ֖עַת ט֣וֹב וָרָ֑ע וְעַתָּ֣ה ׀ פֶּן־יִשְׁלַ֣ח יָד֗וֹ וְלָקַח֙ גַּ֚ם מֵעֵ֣ץ הַֽחַיִּ֔ים וְאָכַ֖ל וָחַ֥י לְעֹלָֽם׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God said "Behold Adam has become like one from us to know good and evil, and now lest he will reach out his hand and take from the tree of life and eat and live to forever"
Notes:
- subjunctive again

Genesis.3.23
English: therefore the LORD God sent him out from the garden of Eden to work the ground from which he was taken.
Greek: καὶ ἐξαπέστειλεν αὐτὸν κύριος ὁ θεὸς ἐκ τοῦ παραδείσου τῆς τρυφῆς ἐργάζεσθαι τὴν γῆν, ἐξ ἧς ἐλήμφθη.
Greek Translation: and the Lord God sent him out of the garden of delight to work the ground, out of which he was taken.
Hebrew:וַֽיְשַׁלְּחֵ֛הוּ יְהוָ֥ה אֱלֹהִ֖ים מִגַּן־עֵ֑דֶן לַֽעֲבֹד֙ אֶת־הָ֣אֲדָמָ֔ה אֲשֶׁ֥ר לֻקַּ֖ח מִשָּֽׁם׃
Hebrew Translation: and the Lord God sent him out of the garden of Eden to work the ground which you were taken from.
Notes:
-

Genesis.3.24
English: He drove out the man, and at the east of the garden of Eden he placed the cherubim and a flaming sword that turned every way to guard the way to the tree of life.
Greek: καὶ ἐξέβαλεν τὸν Αδαμ καὶ κατῴκισεν αὐτὸν ἀπέναντι τοῦ παραδείσου τῆς τρυφῆς καὶ ἔταξεν τὰ χερουβιμ καὶ τὴν φλογίνην ῥομφαίαν τὴν στρεφομένην φυλάσσειν τὴν ὁδὸν τοῦ ξύλου τῆς ζωῆς.
Greek Translation: and He threw Adam out and he settled before the garden of delight and He appointed the cherubim and a flaming sword turning away to guard the road of the tree of life.
Hebrew:וַיְגָ֖רֶשׁ אֶת־הָֽאָדָ֑ם וַיַּשְׁכֵּן֩ מִקֶּ֨דֶם לְגַן־עֵ֜דֶן אֶת־הַכְּרֻבִ֗ים וְאֵ֨ת לַ֤הַט הַחֶ֙רֶב֙ הַמִּתְהַפֶּ֔כֶת לִשְׁמֹ֕ר אֶת־דֶּ֖רֶךְ עֵ֥ץ הַֽחַיִּֽים׃ ס
Hebrew Translation: and He drove Adam out and to the east of the garden of Eden He placed Cherubim and the flaming sword which turns away to guard the path to the tree of life.
Notes:
- weird putting together Greek
